Title: Celebrimbor
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Celebrimbor

Celebrimbor
Celebrimbor was a Ñoldorin prince and the last in the line of the House of Fëanor, who lived in Middle-earth. He was a ruler of Eregion in the Second Age, and a master smith. He is remembered primarily for his creation of the Three Rings of Power: Nenya, Vilya, and Narya, but also he made the second Elfstone (in one version of history) for Galadriel, who would later give it to Aragorn.

Biography
First Age

Celebrimbor was the son of Curufin, who was the fifth son of Fëanor (son of Finwë and his first wife Míriel) and Nerdanel. In the First Age, he fought in the battles of Kinslaying at Alqualondë, Dagor-nuin-Giliath and Dagor Aglareb. After fighting in the Siege of Angband, Dagor Bragollach, Battle of the Pass of Aglond and Fall of Tol Sirion, he lived with his father and uncle in Nargothrond, staying even after Curufin's exile. After fighting in Nirnaeth Arnoediad, he fought in Sack of Nargothrond, and then escaped and traveled to Gondolin. He fought and survived the Fall of Gondolin and Third Kinslaying. Celebrimbor finally fought in the War of Wrath. Unlike some of his kin, he remained in Middle-earth afterwards.

Second Age
Celebrimbor settled in Eregion in the Second Age and started dealing with the Dwarves of the realm of Khazad-dûm. In SA 1500, Sauron, calling himself Annatar ("Lord of Gifts"), befriended the Ñoldor of Eregion. He claimed to be an emissary of the Valar, especially Aulë, and instructed them in the art of ring-making. Celebrimbor distrusted him, but the smiths of Eregion were deceived. Under the guidance and instruction of Sauron, the smiths openly made rings to learn the craft and Celebrimbor himself forged the three Elven rings without assistance from Sauron. But unbeknownst to him, the craft taught by Sauron incorporated a binding magic into the rings.

In secret, Sauron forged the One Ring, a master ring that would rule all the lesser rings, to enable him to rule Middle-earth via its influence over those who used the other rings. When Sauron placed the One Ring on his finger, claiming dominance over all the Rings of Power and their bearers, the Elves knew his true identity and intentions. Celebrimbor and the Elves of Eregion defied Sauron by withholding the other rings from him. The greatest of the rings (aside from the One Ring) were created by Celebrimbor himself, and these were never touched by Sauron and thus were uncorrupted by him, although they were still subject to the One Ring. These were the three Rings of the Elves, the fairest of the Rings of Power. Celebrimbor named them Vilya, Narya, and Nenya after the principal Middle-earth elements of air, fire and water, respectively. He sent the three rings away for safekeeping: Vilya and Narya to Gil-galad in Lindon; and Nenya to Galadriel in Lórien. Celebrimbor also sent the mightiest of the seven to Durin III of Khazad-dûm. Sauron retaliated by attacking Eregion, laying waste to the realm. Celebrimbor was captured in the chaos and was forced, under torture, to disclose the locations of the lesser rings, but he would not reveal the whereabouts of the three greatest of them that he had sent away for safekeeping. Celebrimbor died from his torment; his body was shot with arrows and hung upon a pole, and was later paraded as a banner when Sauron attacked the Grey Havens. Celebrimbor was the last direct descendant of the line of Fëanor, save perhaps for his father's brother Maglor, whose fate was unknown and was said by some legends to still wander the shores of the Sea. It was unknown whether he married; no children were recorded.


However, related to the House of Fëanor were the Kings of Arnor and the Kings of Gondor, descendants of Celebrimbor's great-grandfather Finwë's union with his second wife, Indis. Among them were not just Eärendil, but also Arwen and her husband Aragorn II, who helped bring about Sauron's final defeat in the War of the Ring.

Etymology
His father-name was Telperinquar, which means "Silver fist" or "Hand of silver" in Quenya. It comes from the words telpë ("silver") and quár ("fist"). His mother-name is untold. The name Celebrimbor is the Sindarin translation of his father name, of the roots celeb ("silver") and baur ("fist").

Character
Unlike both his father and grandfather, Celebrimbor was selfless and kind, and neither prideful nor covetous of what he created. He was described to have an "almost Dwarvish obsession with crafts"; he became a famous artificer and smith in both Gondolin and Eregion. His love for crafts took him to Eregion, where he was introduced to a precious metal which he called mithril. Mithril was mined by Dwarves in nearby Khazad-dûm, later named Moria. Great friendship with the Dwarves of Moria developed, and skills and secrets were shared between Moria and Eregion for many years via the Elven-way. But a long period of peace would not last, for upon realizing the trap which Sauron had devised for him, Celebrimbor was filled with anxiety and fear for his people, and was later described as the heroic defender of Eregion.

Important works
Rings of Power
The Nine Rings of Men (with Annatar)
The Seven Rings of the Dwarves (with Annatar)
The Three Rings of the Elves
Doors of Durin (with Narvi)
House of Fëanor
The Heraldic Device of the House of FëanorThe Heraldic Device of the Three Silmarils

Finwë		 
Míriel	
Mahtan 
Fëanor	
Nerdanel 	 
Maedhros		 
Maglor	
Celegorm	 
Caranthir	 
Curufin	 
Amrod
Amras	 
Celebrimbor

In other versions
In early accounts, Celebrimbor was a Sindar Elf instead, an ancestor of the minstrel Daeron who used the Fëanorian script. Later, Celebrimbor was changed to a Ñoldo who had served Turgon in Gondolin and survived the Fall of Gondolin.

In Unfinished Tales, a statement claims Celebrimbor to be one of the Teleri who accompanied Celeborn to exile.

Another earlier version had Celebrimbor revolting against Galadriel after she and Celeborn established Eregion. Celebrimbor and Galadriel were later reconciled once Sauron's trickery was revealed.

In adaptations
Video games

Celebrimbor appears in the video games Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor and Middle-earth: Shadow of War, as the wraith assisting the Ranger Talion in destroying the forces of Sauron. Here, he assists Talion due to the guilt he feels for creating the Rings of Power, thus feeling responsible for the trouble Middle-earth is in. However, the Celebrimbor that appears in the game differs from Tolkien's creation in that he not only makes the three Elf rings, but he crafts all of the Rings of Power, and when captured helps Sauron reforge the One Ring (via the inscription of the lettering of the Ring upon it) and assists him in creating the Nazgûl by accompanying Sauron to the men who eventually would become the Nine; he also gave the Ring a will of its own. However, once Sauron's intentions were revealed to him, he stole the One Ring and used it to command an army of Orcs and Uruks to fight Sauron and lay claim over Mordor. However, using the Ring, Celebrimbor is revealed to have developed a superiority complex and an insane obsession with taking everything from the dark lord for himself, so much so, that even Sauron himself could see the darkness within his heart, going so far as to believe that Sauron had already killed his family and was lying that he would spare them. In a final battle, Celebrimbor used the Ring's power to defeat Sauron. However the Ring wanted to return to the Dark Lord, and so it slipped off of Celebrimbor's finger and onto Sauron's, breaking Celebrimbor's control over his Orc army. Captured by Sauron, the elf was then tortured as punishment, such as witnessing his family tortured and killed in front of him, before finally being beaten to death by Sauron with Túrann, Celebrimbor's own Mithril hammer.

When the game takes place and the protagonist, Talion, is slain in a blood-ritual, Celebrimbor is bound to the Ranger, which allows Talion to return from the dead (in addition to many other abilities). He has no memory of his past, not even remembering his own name until they find an artifact that belonged to him (with the assistance of Gollum,) and with each artifact they find more of his memory is restored. Gollum eventually abandons them, leaving them to find the last artifact in Udûn on their own. They also assist a low ranking captain named Ratbag advance through the ranks until he advances to Warchief, and kill all other warchiefs (leaving Ratbag in charge of all the Uruks in Udûn), which leads to his apparent demise after he is blamed for failing to prevent the destruction of a monument to Sauron by the Hammer of Sauron, a Black Captain and a lieutenant of the Black Hand of Sauron (the leader of the Uruks in Sauron's stead). Talion (and Celebrimbor) is approached by Lithariel, the daughter of Marwen, Queen of the Tribesmen of Núrnen, who claims her mother has summoned Talion to her chambers.

Their job finished in Udûn, they make their way to Núrnen and have an audience with Queen Marwen (who looks similar to King Théoden when he was enchanted by Saruman), who gives them another artifact from Celebrimbor's past.

This artifact gives the wraith and his host their key to confronting the Black Hand: branding. They begin building their army by branding the captains and warchiefs of Núrnen (and optionally Udûn), thus enabling them to confront the Black Hand at his fortress of Ered Glamhoth, the strength of his forces depending on how many warchiefs and captains he branded. They return to the queen to tell her they are prepared to leave when suddenly the Queen begins forcing Celebrimbor out of Talion, saying that they can defeat Sauron "together." As Talion dies, he tells Lithariel, Marwen's daughter, to break the Queen's staff, and when it breaks, the Queen becomes youthful again, and reveals she went to the Istari Saruman for assistance in helping her people survive Sauron's onslaught. Celebrimbor suspects that Saruman may have gone rogue, and may be desiring the One for himself. Marwen nonetheless assists Talion by acquiring them a smuggler, which they use to go to the Black Hand's fortress.

When Talion enters the fortress, a skeleton bound to a pole by rope begins talking directly to Talion, and Celebrimbor reveals that the Tower of Sauron, another Black Captain and the Black Hand's right hand, is responsible for this, and thus is here in the Black Hand's stead. Talion approaches the Black Hand's throne, and as he looks for the Tower, the Black Captain appears in the throne, and reveals the Black Hand went looking for Talion. He addresses Celebrimbor directly, telling him Sauron forgives him and, if he casts off that "corpse" and becomes one with him, he will have his dreams fulfilled. Celebrimbor rebukes the Tower, saying that Talion and the wraith will never surrender.

Failing to deceive Celebrimbor, he reveals to Talion that the Ringmaker deceived Talion by pretending that the Black Hand of Sauron placed a curse on them, binding them together, where in reality Celebrimbor chose Talion as his "host" and could have released him at any time. Talion insists that the Tower stand up and fight, to which the Tower obliges. He creates illusions of himself, forcing Talion to drain the illusions to sap the Tower of his power.

After the illusions are eliminated, Talion hears his wife Ioreth singing, and when he gets close to her, his wife is revealed as the Tower, who attempts to brand Talion. However, the Ranger overpowers him and brutally kills him, stabbing him with his son's dagger, Acharn, four times in the heart, before shoving his sword, Urfael, into the Tower's laughing mouth. After the Tower's death, Talion reveals his anger at Celebrimbor for his deceit, saying he wanted to be with his wife and son instead of being alone alive. Celebrimbor points out though that the Ranger wanted revenge, and thus he gave him the means to do so. The Ringmaker does admit that he can leave Talion, if he wants. Yet before they can part ways, the wraith says that they must finish what they started by killing their true target: the Black Hand. Talion reluctantly agrees, and the pair set sail for Núrnen once more.

However, they find the Queen's palace sacked, and blood on the throne. The queen's crown, however, was left, and when Talion picks it up, another set of Celebrimbor's memories are returned to him. They figure the Black Hand has them in Udûn, preparing an exchange for Celebrimbor for the Queen and her daughter. They arrive in the now-dark, ashed filled Udûn, where they find the Black Hand's elite guards standing watch for the duo. When the Talion arrives at the Black Gate riding a Caragor, his branded Uruks and warchiefs are already fighting the rank and file Uruks. Then finally, with a warchief and a set of captains, the Talons of the Black Hand reveal themselves, along with a host of rank and file Uruks. To Talion's sadness, The Talons reveal that they slaughtered all of the Núrnen tribesman, including Lithariel and Queen Marwen. After a brutal fight, the Talons are defeated, and the remaining branded Uruks that assisted Talion remain behind to fight the Black Hand's forces. Meanwhile, the Gravewalker climbs the Black Gate, and find the Black Hand waiting for him. Then quite subtly, the Black Captain lures the wraith duo in and unleashes a blast of energy that gives Celebrimbor more of his memories: his confrontation with Sauron in the fields of Udûn ending in failure, the return of Sauron's ring, and the brutal murders of Celebrimbor's family before his eyes, before being murdered himself. This gives Celebrimbor more power as a result. The Black Hand tells Celebrimbor that when he originally performed the blood ritual in an attempt to absorb his spirit into the Black Hand's corporeal form (thus reforming an avatar of Sauron, though he would not be at full strength), he gave him a choice: to stand by Sauron's side. He then tells the grave-walker duo that Talion and Celebrimbor have no choice in the matter, and surprisingly performs the blood ritual on himself, absorbing Celebrimbor into the Black Hand and forming the avatar of Sauron. Sauron tries to kill the already dying Talion, but as Sauron is about to deliver the finishing blow, Celebrimbor uses his energy to temporarily stun Sauron. This gives Talion the chance he needed to kill the avatar of Sauron, and thus the Black Hand, with his sword.

Talion relieved that he has finally exacted vengeance for his family, sees Celebrimbor waiting, ready to go to the afterlife together. Talion, however, insists that together they should use their powers to combat Sauron, because they both know as long as his Ring exists, he will return again, no matter in what form. Celebrimbor insists that fighting Sauron is mortally impossible, because he tried once long ago and it couldn't be done. Talion asks the Ringmaker if he could die knowing there was chance that they could defeat Sauron, but they didn't take it. Celebrimbor simply disappears, and doesn't answer. Talion, looking at Udûn's red sun, declares to himself and the wraith that it's time for them to forge new ring, as his eyes glow with the wraith's power.

The two then travel to Mount Doom, and proceed to forge a New Ring. Upon its completion, Celebrimbor is separated from Talion by Shelob, and Talion takes the new ring to survive without the wraith. He later finds him in Shelob's Lair within Cirith Ungol, and gives her the new ring in exchange for Celebrimbor. The Elven wraith dislikes this exchange however, but Shelob's natural powers amplified by the ring prove to be too strong to fight, and thus the duo shifts their attention to a new target: the palantír in Minas Ithil.

After the city's eventual fall, Sauron sends 8 ringwraiths to force the new ring from Shelob. Realizing the danger that keeping the ring would cause to both her and to Middle-earth, she returns the ring to its forgers. The ranger and the wraith then proceed to Nurnen, where they use the ring's power to build an army and take over the region; Subsequently, they are betrayed by an ally in the process, only to exact revenge on him with utter cruelty. Of course, Celebrimbor's cruelty hints to Talion that the ring's power is starting to affect the elf's sanity.

Eventually, after conquering most of Sauron's domain, defeating a Balrog with the help of Carnan, a nature spirit, and finding out the identities of some of the Nazgul, the duo takes their army and march towards Barad-dûr, only to be stopped by one of the ringwraiths, Isildur. Upon his defeat, Talion decides to end the fallen hero's torment, and permanently kills him. However, Celebrimbor considers this an act of betrayal; he reveals that his plan has gone from simple revenge to tyranny, as he plans on brainwashing Sauron and ruling Middle-earth through him. As Talion objects to this plan, the wraith abandons the Ranger's body and takes over Eltariel's, leaving Talion to bleed to death.

As Talion picks up Isildur's ring, he becomes a ringwraith and decides to take back Minas Morgul, whilst Celebrimbor and his new host face Sauron. Eventually, Sauron, in his Annatar form, finds himself on his knees, and Celebrimbor begins to dominate him. But in a sudden moment of resistance, Sauron pulls out a blade and slices off Eltariel's fingers, just like Isildur had done to him centuries earlier. With Sauron now having the upper hand, he consumes the wraith, but with adverse effects; rather than one consuming the other, they both joined to become the flaming Eye of Sauron, locked into a battle of wills. Their unending struggle for dominance lasted over the entire course of the War of the Ring until the One Ring was destroyed in Orodruin, wherein Sauron's power was finally broken.

However, Celebrimbor did not fade from Middle-earth as Sauron did. Like the Dark Lord, the Bright Lord had poured his own life force into forging his Ring, which had been taken by Eltariel on command of Galadriel. Thus, Celebrimbor's spirit was freed from Barad-dûr as it collapsed and fled to parts unknown. Soon, the New Ring started expressing a desire to return to its creator, much like the One Ring, and Eltariel planned to find him.

Celebrimbor is voiced by Alastair Duncan.

The Lord of the Rings Online
In The Lord of the Rings Online, Celebrimbor appears in several flashback sequences, depicting his encounter with the "Lord of Gifts", the initial idea of creating the Rings of Power, and his final doomed stand during the Sack of Eregion.

The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power

"Lord Celebrimbor - Celebrimbor is a visionary artisan and Elf-lord of Eregion who has a plan to undertake a great work that will transform Middle-earth into a place whose beauty can rival even the grace of Valinor itself."
—Official description on Amazon.com
Celebrimbor is a significant character in the first two seasons of Amazon Studios' series The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power, portrayed by Charles Edwards.

Celebrimbor is first seen introduced to Elrond by Gil-galad in Lindon; already a master artisan. Elrond accompanies Celebrimbor back to Ost-in-Edhil, in Eregion, where Celebrimbor shows him his grandfather Fëanor's hammer, and tells him of his own desire to create something truly significant. This requires a forge greater than any yet built; one which the Elves have not the ability to make. Elrond, because of his friendship with the Dwarf-prince Durin IV, volunteers to attempt forging an alliance between Eregion and Khazad-dûm. Celebrimbor walks with Elrond to Khazad-dûm's West-gate, but Elrond ventures in alone.

Elrond eventually is able to negotiate an agreement with Durin IV and his father, Durin III, and work on the proposed forge soon begins. Upon Elrond's return to Ost-in-Edhil, Celebrimbor remarks on Elrond's likeness to his father Eärendil, and how Eärendil once foresaw Celebrimbor's fate to lie in Elrond's hands one day. The two then realize that Durin IV has started to avoid them, and Elrond travels back to Khazad-dûm, where he learns that the dwarf-prince has discovered a new ore, which he calls mithril.

After a meeting arranged by Gil-galad in Lindon, Elrond allows Celebrimbor to examine a small fragment of mithril. Celebrimbor is enthralled by its beauty and resiliency, and expresses the belief that by mining vast quantities of it, the supposed remnant of light from a Silmaril contained in the metal could stave off the impending doom for Elves that Gil-galad, and he had discovered.

After Durin III refuses to mine for mithril, Elrond returns to Eregion and is resigned that the Elves must leave Middle-earth, though Celebrimbor still desires to try to use the small fragment Elrond had acquired. Galadriel unexpectedly arrives in Ost-in-Edhil with a wounded Halbrand, who, unbeknownst to the Elves, is Sauron in disguise. Sauron soon recovers and comes to Celebrimbor's forge, where he learns of mithril and makes critical suggestions on how to amplify its restorative properties. This catches Celebrimbor's attention, and soon Sauron has the Master-smith's trust as they attempt to forge a creation that will prevent the Elves from fading. Galadriel becomes suspicious when Celebrimbor repeats several phrases said by Adar to be from Sauron, and though she soon discovers Halbrand's true identity, she withholds this knowledge from Celebrimbor so that the forging can continue. At Galadriel's suggestion, Celebrimbor forges three rings instead of the initially proposed two, and is satisfied with his new creation.

Gil-galad, in Lindon, has learned from Galadriel that Halbrand is Sauron. He sends an urgent letter to Celebrimbor informing him of this news. The messenger is killed on the way and never arrives. Halbrand arrives at Ost-in-Edhil and asks to see Celebrimbor. The latter has promised Galadriel not to speak to the king of the Southlands again and leaves him at the door.

Celebrimbor, shows Mirdania his assistant, his new invention with the Mithril, the Ithildin, which shines only in the light of the moon. He finally goes to see Halbrand and orders him to leave. Halbrand manipulates him. He makes him believe that he has seen Galadriel, that the Rings have saved the Great Tree and the Elves, but that Gil-galad has not even bothered to warn the master blacksmith. Finally, Celebrimbor brings him in. Halbrand asks him to make Rings for Men, but when Celebrimbor refuses, he tells him that he is in fact sent from the Valar to counter the Shadow. Halbrand suddenly disappears and then reappears in the fire in the form of Annatar. By further flattering Celebrimbor's ego, calling him the Lord of the Rings, Celebrimbor will finally agree to forge rings for the Dwarves.

Durin and Disa are received by Celebrimbor and Annatar, who offer to forge Rings of Power to heal the mountains of the dwarves, who have suffered from earthquakes, in exchange for Mithril. The offer was made to them rather than to the king, because the blacksmith knew that he did not like outside help. Durin is skeptical, suspicious of the Rings, and he doesn't like Annatar. Disa ends up convincing him of the emergency to save Khazad-dûm who has no more food.

Annatar tricks Celebrimbor into believing that Gil-galad has forbidden the making of any more Rings, and flatters the Blacksmith's vanity. The latter takes the bait. He writes to his king that he is closing the great forge, but is going to make the Rings for the Dwarves. It is the ultimate goal of his life, his masterpiece.

Durin III, having no solution for his kingdom, accepts the offer and brings the Mithril to forge the Seven Rings. He gives it to Celebrimbor, but Annatar takes it from him and holds it in his clenched fist before adding it to the molten metal and starting to forge the new rings.

Celebrimbor celebrates with Narvi the creation of Durin's Gates in Ost-in-Edhil. Annatar looks troubled. He argues with the blacksmith, he suffers for the men and asks for Rings for them. The blacksmith doesn't want to, men are too easily corruptible, and even helped Adar. Annatar tells him about the great men of the First Age, and that they can find good and noble men in the kingdoms of Middle-earth or Númenor. Celebrimbor says no, Annatar accepts him, he will forge the Rings without him.

In the forge of Ost-in-Edhil, there is panic, tools are flying. Celebrimbor comes running. Annatar explains to him that he made a ring with more Mithril, to limit the risk of corruption in men, and that when Mirdania tried it on to check the size, she disappeared. He would like the master blacksmith to help him not to make any mistakes. Following a flying hammer, Celebrimbor grabs his apprentice and removes the ring. Durin IV arrives just at this moment and wants to see the lord of the place. He informs the blacksmith of his father's strange behavior since he has the ring, he has become greedy and irritable, forgetting his past caution. Celebrimbor explains that they used the same process as for the Elven Rings, which work very well. Durin suggests that the problem may be with Annatar.

Celebrimbor goes to see Annatar, to find out if anything happened during the creation of the Rings of the Dwarves. Annatar replies that he didn't do anything himself, but that they created the Rings with their minds polluted by Celebrimbor's lying letter, telling the High King that he will not forge new rings. Celebrimbor does not want to denounce himself to Gil-galad, whose wrath he fears.

Celebrimbor decides to forge the Nine Rings of Men with Annatar, to balance those of the dwarves. They have to be perfect and even threaten these assistants with expulsion if they make the slightest mistake. Annatar reassures them afterwards, explaining that the blacksmith is overwhelmed by the importance of the Rings. Despite his doubts, Celebrimbor begins to forge the Nine.

He can't forge the Rings of Men, and they have no Mithril left. He is very irritable and can't remember the name of his protégé. Annatar then shows up with a request from citizens who want to speak to their lord. Celebrimbor confides in him that he is tired and confused, but that the Rings come first. Annatar takes charge of the administration of the city and the supply of Mithril.

At Ost-in-Edhil, the enemies were finally seen and the alarm sounded. There is panic in the city. Annatar cuts his hand with a knife and goes up to see Celebrimbor. The latter, who is working on The Rings of Men, wonders the nature of the noise he hears outside. Annatar tries to hold him back, but the blacksmith wants to get off and see what happens. Sauron then casts a spell and when Celebrimbor comes out of the tower, he sees the city by day where everything seems idyllic. Annatar hands him the hammer of Fëanor, he explains that the Rings of Power will be his life's work and that they will eclipse the Silmarils in the memory of the elves. He gives him the little Mithril he has obtained. Celebrimbor climbs back into his tower to continue his work, for a final try. As soon as the blacksmith disappears, the reality of the panicked night city returns. Annatar smiled at the chaos to come.

Celebrimbor remains in the grip of the spell, which forms a mind prison, and quietly forges the Nine Rings of Men with the Mithril brought back by Annatar. Outside, it is the chaos of war, the city is in flames and ruins. To Captain Malendol, Annatar tells that Celebrimbor has ordered not to counterattack, but that they will disobey and that the troops must be prepared. Mirdania is outraged by her lord's attitude, but Annatar confides in her that he has lost his mind.

When he goes back to see the blacksmith, he understands that time runs in a loop. Annatar admits that it is his work and the discussion becomes heated. Celebrimbor then asks him who he really is and throws Fëanor's hammer at him, which breaks a window. The blacksmith finally hears the sounds of war and discovers the damage in his forge. He inadvertently spills the Mithril, but it is black blood and not metal. Annatar shows him his slashed hand and the dark blood that flows from it. Celebrimbor finally understands that he is in front of Sauron.

He rushes to warn Mirdania, who disbelieves him. To further discredit Celebrimbor, Sauron, still in his guise as Annatar, manipulates Celebrimbor against his will into flinging Mirdania from the rampart to the Orcs below. A large Orc then kills her.

Annatar tells Celebrimbor that if he could finish the nine, he would save the city. Celebrimbor and Annatar go back to the tower where Celebrimbor is chained to his workbench. Annatar talks to Celebrimbor about Morgoth, and how it was being slaved under god, with Celebrimbor replaying "I cannot imagine". When Annatar leaves the tower and goes back to the city, Celebrimbor tries many methods to escape. After many methods, he sees the only way to escape, to remove his own thumb so that his hand can fit through the shackles. He does that and leaves the tower and sees the devastation over his city. He meets the Captain Malendol and his men. They continue to be deceived of Annatar's false kindness and are just about to lead Celebrimbor back into his tower when Galadriel shows up. She disrupts Malendol and the guards and share a moment with Celebrimbor. Celebrimbor gives her the nine and reminds that the Elves must fight the Shadow with the Light, the Captain and the guards follows him to confront Sauron.

They come to the tower to find him looking aggressively for the rings. The guards surround Annatar and Malendol begins to talk when he is silenced against his own will. Sauron says: "You think it was only you, that put yourself in my power?" to Celebrimbor. He then makes the guards turn on each other and kill each other with a twist of Saurons's hand. Malendol is then also slain with the help of Sauron's sorcery.

After the deaths of Malendol and the guards, Celebrimbor still refuses to say were the rings are. Sauron shoots him with arrows as he lays down on the ground against a pillar. He talks to Celebrimbor and asks him one last time for the rings, but Celebrimbor still refuses to say their location. He then says his final words and Sauron impales him with a banner staff. Celerimbor dies and Sauron sheds a tear, as he had wanted to keep Celebrimbor alive but was angered by his words. He is then interrupted by Glûg and makes the orcs turn on Adar.