Title: Cuivienen
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Cuivi%C3%A9nen

Cuiviénen
Cuiviénen (Quenya; IPA: kuɪviˈeːnen) was the location where the Quendi, or Elves, first awoke, in the far east of Arda.

Description
Cuiviénen was said to have been on the shore of a large gulf in the inland Sea of Helcar, in the distant east of Middle-earth. It was an eastern bay of the Inland Sea of Helcar, formed by the meltwaters of the pillar of Illuin when Melkor destroyed the Two Lamps, before the Years of the Trees.

After the First Age and the War of Wrath, the Sea of Helcar and Cuiviénen were drained, leaving behind only the Sea of Núrnen and Sea of Rhûn, prompting the Elvish adage "and to Cuiviénen there is no returning", both a reference to physical geography and a metaphor for the Sundering of the Elves.

History
In YT 1050, the Awakening of the Elves took place in Cuiviénen. The Elves dwelt there for a long time in bliss under the starlight, and were content. They divided into three basic groups: the Minyar (Vanyar), Tatyar (Ñoldor), and Nelyar (Teleri), and in Cuiviénen learned or developed culture, skills of survival, and language. Unfortunately, Melkor discovered this land first before the other Valar. Many Elves feared him when they saw him, and were forced to exit Cuiviénen and hide, while those unfortunate enough to be left behind or overwhelmed by fear and unhappiness were taken by Melkor or slain. Then, years later, the Vala Oromë discovered Cuiviénen on his travels throughout Middle-earth. Oromë reported his discovery back to the Valar in Valinor, and, after a Great Debate, they decided that the Elves would be safer living in the Undying Lands, in the peace and protection of the Valar. Oromë returned to Cuiviénen and relayed this to the Elves, urging them to emigrate far west to Valinor. And so the first Sundering of the Elves took place when the Eldar, the name given by Oromë to the Elves using their own tongue, departed from Cuiviénen to Valinor, on what was called the Great Journey. Some of these Elves refused to leave, from fear of the unknown, and turned back after reaching the huge range of the Misty Mountains, or simply decided to stay in Middle-earth (and not return to Cuiviénen) by choice.

It is untold for how long the remaining Avari remained at Cuiviénen in the First Age, but, they were there when Men awoke at the first rising of the Sun in the nearby land of Hildórien, and its Elven residents befriended early Men and apparently taught them the basic skills of survival.

Other mentions
In his attempt to sway the Ñoldor to join him in pursuit of Melkor to Middle-earth, Fëanor spoke of the "sweet waters" of Cuiviénen that they had left in vain to travel to Aman.

Etymology
Cuiviénen is a Quenya name that means "Water of Awakening", from cuivié ("awakening") and nen ("water").