Title: Elrond
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Elrond

Elrond
"The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark as the shadows of twilight, and upon it was set a circlet of silver; his eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale as a tried warrior in the fulness of his strength. He was the Lord of Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men."
—The Fellowship of the Ring, "Many Meetings"
Elrond was a mighty Half-elf ruler who dwelt in Middle-earth from the First Age to the beginning of the Fourth Age. He was the Lord of Rivendell and father of Elladan, Elrohir, and Arwen Undómiel, the eventual wife of Aragorn II. He was given the epithet of Peredhel, Sindarin for Half-elven.


First Age
Elrond Peredhel was the son of Eärendil and Elwing, and great-grandson of Lúthien. He was born in the refuge of the Havens of Sirion in Beleriand late in the First Age, soon before its sack by the Sons of Fëanor. Elrond and his twin brother Elros were captured and raised by Maglor, a son of Fëanor. Though at first there was no great love between them, eventually Maglor took pity on them and cherished them, and eventually grew to love them.By the end of the First Age and the War of Wrath, the Sons of Fëanor were again working alone, suggesting that by this time, Elrond and Elros had left their nominal captivity and traveled to Lindon.

Second Age
Elrond and Elros were given the choice at the end of the First Age to be counted among Men or Elves. Elros chose the Fate of Men and became Elros Tar-Minyatur, the first King of Númenor. Elrond Half-elven chose to be counted among the Elves,and remained in Lindon as captain and herald of Gil-galad, the High King of the Ñoldor.
With the start of the War of the Elves and Sauron in SA 1695, Elrond was sent to Eregion by Gil-galad in an attempt to protect it from the invading forces of Sauron. Unfortunately, Elrond's host arrived too late and was not large enough on its own to defeat Sauron's army. He retreated north with the refugees of Eregion, including Celeborn, only escaping because the forces of Durin III assailed Sauron's army in the rear. It was during the following two years (SA 1697) that Elrond founded Rivendell at the feet of the Misty Mountains, as a sanctuary and stronghold. For the next four years, Rivendell was besieged by Sauron's forces.

With the arrival of the Númenóreans, the army besieging Rivendell was caught between the forces of Gil-galad and Elrond and destroyed. Elrond remained in Rivendell and hosted the first White Council, attended by Galadriel, at which it was decided that Elrond's home, the Last Homely House, would remain the last stronghold west of the Misty Mountains, and that the Three Rings then held by Gil-galad and Galadriel would remain hidden. According to one account Gil-galad at this time gave Elrond Vilya the Blue Ring, though in other accounts Gil-galad kept both Narya and Vilya until the end of the Second Age. It was also here that Elrond first met Celebrían, the daughter of Celeborn and Galadriel.

Near the end of the Second Age, Elrond rode beside Gil-galad in the Last Alliance of Elves and Men, which set out from Rivendell to Mordor in SA 3431. Elrond was Gil-galad's herald during the war against Sauron. The Alliance, which also included Elves from Lothlórien, Men from Arnor and Gondor, and Dwarves likely led by Durin IV, defeated Sauron's army at the Battle of Dagorlad and laid siege to Barad-dûr for seven years. Eventually, Sauron himself was defeated by Elendil and Gil-galad, allowing Isildur to cut the One Ring from Sauron's finger and claim it for himself.

The war took a toll on the forces of both Elves and Men. Gil-galad, Elendil, and his younger son Anárion were killed in the siege. Elrond and Círdan only remained as the commanders of the Elves, and Isildur as High King of the Realms in Exile. Upon discovering that Isildur had claimed the One Ring for himself, Elrond urged Isildur to throw the Ring into the fires of Mount Doom, but the seduction of the Ring made Isildur refuse. Isildur claimed the Ring as a weregild for his father and brother, and Elrond (perhaps not fully understanding the nature of the One Ring) acknowledged his claim. Elrond then returned to Rivendell at the end of the war.
Third Age

In the year TA 109, Elrond wedded Celebrían. In the year TA 130, the twins Elladan and Elrohir were born, and in TA 241 a daughter, Arwen Undómiel. Elrond lost Celebrían in TA 2510 when she was waylaid by Orcs crossing the Misty Mountains and, unable to recover, took a ship to the Undying Lands.
In the later years, he was instrumental in harboring the heirs of Isildur while the line lasted, the most famous of these sons of men was Aragorn II, whom he took in and fostered as his own after his father Arathorn II died in TA 2933. Elrond, foreseeing the boy's difficult future gave him the name Estel, Sindarin for hope. Aragorn grew up in Imladris unaware of his royal lineage until Elrond told him when he had reached his manhood.
He also was a member of the White Council, which was often held in Rivendell, and was a great friend of Gandalf the Grey. He helped Thorin II's expedition to retake the Lonely Mountain by discovering and translating the Moon Writing on Thorin's map.

Upon learning that Aragorn and Arwen had become betrothed in TA 2980, Elrond was sorrowful, knowing that his daughter had made a choice to become mortal and therefore decreed that for such a price she could marry no less a man than the King of Arnor and Gondor.

After Frodo's departure from the Shire with the One Ring, Elrond sent out riders to help guide him back to Rivendell. One of these, Glorfindel, successfully found Frodo and helped him reach Rivendell. On October 25, 3018 he held the Council at which it was decided to attempt to destroy the One Ring. He appeared to have selected the members of the Fellowship other than Frodo and Sam.

Five months later, Elrond sent his sons Elladan and Elrohir with the Rangers of the North to Rohan. Through his sons, Elrond advised Aragorn to take the Paths of the Dead.

Elrond remained in Rivendell until the destruction of the One Ring and of Sauron, after which he went to Minas Tirith to surrender the Sceptre of Annúminas to King Elessar and give his daughter Arwen Undómiel away to be married. On September 29, 3021, Elrond left Middle-earth to go over the sea with the other Ring-bearers, never to return.

Etymology
Elrond is a Sindarin name that means "Star-dome" or "Elf of the cave", from el ("Elf" or "star", interchangeably) and rond ("cave, vault").

Character
Elrond was a skillful warrior in battle and had commanded various Elven armies, including the Last Alliance. He was as effective at leadership and giving counsel. He also had the gift of foresight, through which he could view lands or events far away from Rivendell.

A notable demonstration of the power of his ring, Vilya, included the summoning a great flood on the Bruinen to sweep away the Nazgûl that pursued Frodo and Glorfindel. Elrond was familiar with ósanwe, the skill of entering others' minds. After the destruction of the One Ring, Elrond communicated telepathically with Galadriel and Gandalf on their return journey from Minas Tirith.

Elrond was one of the most incorruptible of leaders of Middle-earth. Aragorn speculated that among the few capable of completely resisting Saruman's power of speech were Elrond, Galadriel, and Gandalf.tation needed Elrond also rejected and opposed Sauron when the latter offered partnership with the Elves.

Line of the Half-elves

Finwë	
 	 
Indis
	 
Fingolfin	
 	 
 	 
Anairë	
 	 
 	 
Galdor	
	 
Thingol	
 	 
 	 
Melian
	 
Elenwë	
 	 	 
Turgon	
	 
Huor	
 	 
 	 
Rían	
 	 
 	 
Beren	
 	 
 	 
Lúthien
	 
 	 
Idril	
	 
Tuor	
 	 
Dior	
 	 
 	 
Nimloth
	 
Eärendil	
 		 
Elwing	
 	 
Eluréd and Elurín
	 
Elros	
	 
Elrond	
	 
Celebrían
 
Kings of Númenor	
	 
Lords of Andúnië	
	 
Elendil	
	 
Isildur	
 	 
Anárion	
	 
Kings of Arnor	
	 
Kings of Gondor	
	 
Chieftains of
the Dúnedain	
	 
Aragorn II Elessar	
 	 
Arwen	
 	 
 	 
Elladan	
 	 
 	 
Elrohir
	 
Eldarion	
	 
Daughters
The marriages between Elves and Men are in bold.
The Half-elves or the Peredhil are in italic.

In adaptations
Elrond (1977)
Elrond (1977)

The Hobbit (1977 animated film)
In the 1977 film The Hobbit, Elrond is voiced by Cyril Ritchard.

The Lord of the Rings (1978)
Elrond (1978)
Elrond (1978)

In The Lord of the Rings animated film (1978), Elrond is voiced by André Morell.

The Return of the King (1980)
Elrond (1980)
Elrond (1980)

In The Return of the King film by Rankin and Bass (1980), Elrond is voiced by Paul Frees.

The Lord of the Rings film trilogy

"I was there, Gandalf. I was there three thousand years ago, when Isildur took the ring. I was there the day the strength of Men failed."
—Elrond in The Fellowship of the Ring
Elrond appears extensively in Peter Jackson's film trilogy. He appears in all three films, portrayed by Hugo Weaving.

Jackson's characterization of Elrond departs in several ways from Tolkien's own. Like the other Elves, Elrond is somewhat aloof in the films. He distrusts the race of Men, although he knows that the time of the Elves is over. In a significant change from the books, he is distressed at the thought of Arwen becoming mortal for the sake of Aragorn, and initially suggests she leave Middle-earth for Valinor. Though wise and virtuous, Jackson's Elrond appears unconvinced that Sauron can be defeated. Some have drawn similarities between Jackson's portrayal of the Elves, and of Elrond in particular, and the portrayal of the highly rational Vulcan race in Star Trek, or to Tolkien's own characterization of the Elf Thingol, who does not appear in the films.

In The Fellowship of the Ring, Elrond is first seen in the prologue at the Battle of Dagorlad as a lieutenant of the Ñoldor. He later appears in Rivendell, having summoned a council of Men, Dwarves, and Elves to decide the fate of the One Ring. He learns from Gandalf that Saruman, head of the White Council, has betrayed them by becoming one of Sauron's allies, which causes him to acknowledge that their allies were reducing. He tells Gandalf that the ring cannot stay here. He then recounts a flashback to Gandalf in which he witnesses Isildur's refusal to destroy the Ring, an event that makes Elrond forever suspicious of men. After some heated discussion, Elrond declares that the Ring must be destroyed in Mount Doom. Frodo volunteers to be the Ring-bearer, and Elrond titles Frodo and his companions the Fellowship of the Ring.

In The Two Towers, Elrond tries to convince Arwen to choose immortality and depart for Valinor, where her love for Aragorn may "bloom evergreen." After Elrond tells Arwen that he has foreseen her widowhood and eventual death, she emotionally agrees to take his father's counsel and leave Middle-earth. Later in the film, Elrond communicates telepathically with Galadriel regarding the fate of Rohan. He agrees to send a contingent of Elvish warriors to aid Théoden's men at Helm's Deep. (Strangely, the Elves that arrive at Helm's Deep near the beginning of the Battle of the Hornburg are from Lothlórien, not Rivendell.)

In The Return of the King, Arwen confronts Elrond early in the film after witnessing a vision of her own future son, Eldarion. Realizing that Arwen's love for Aragorn cannot be overcome, Elrond agrees to reforge Narsil, the sword of Elendil, into Andúril. Later, Elrond delivers Andúril to Aragorn at Dunharrow, and urges him to reclaim the throne of Gondor and take command of the Army of the Dead. Elrond does not appear again until the film's epilogue, where he presents Arwen to Aragorn at the latter's coronation. Elrond appears one last time at the Grey Havens, where he departs Middle-earth with Gandalf, Celeborn, Galadriel, Bilbo, and Frodo.

The Hobbit film trilogy
Hugo Weaving reprises his role as Elrond in Jackson's The Hobbit film trilogy, appearing in the first and third instalments. His role is expanded from his brief appearance in Tolkien's original novel.

Elrond initially appears in An Unexpected Journey when the Elves of Rivendell ambush the Warg-riders chasing Thorin and Company. Elrond wields Hadhafang (Arwen's sword in The Fellowship of the Ring) and is accompanied by Lindir. He warmly welcomes Gandalf and Thorin into Rivendell and identifies their respective swords, Glamdring, Orcrist and the morgul-blade.

When Elrond inquires as to why they were journeying on the East-West Road, Gandalf persuades Thorin to show Elrond the map of Erebor. Thorin is reluctant, but in his desperation he hands Elrond the map. Elrond realizes that the writing is written in moon runes. He holds the map under the moonlight and translates the ancient writing, revealing the secret passage into the Lonely Mountain. He then deduces that Thorin intends to enter the mountain and reclaim the treasure. Elrond is skeptical of the Dwarves' ability to succeed, knowing of the sickness Thorin's grandfather Thrór developed that attracted Smaug in the first place.

Elrond feels that Gandalf should explain Thorin's quest to the White Council, and the two meet with Galadriel and Saruman. Elrond at first is doubtful of Gandalf's warnings about the possibility of Sauron's return, but when Gandalf reveals the Morgul-blade from Dol Guldur, Elrond is horrified. He explains that the tombs of the Nazgûl are protected by powerful spells. He is then notified by Lindir that the Dwarves have left Rivendell.

Elrond reappears in The Battle of the Five Armies in which he, Saruman, and Galadriel rescue Gandalf from Dol Guldur. Elrond and Saruman reveal themselves just as Galadriel and Gandalf are surrounded by the specters of the Nazgûl. Elrond duels with them, visibly wielding his ring Vilya, and notably holds his own against several wraiths at once, before they are all defeated. He attempts to defend Galadriel as Sauron manifests before them, along with all of the Nine. Elrond then watches on in amazement as Galadriel takes on a terrifying form to repel Sauron. After Sauron and the Nazgûl are cast into the East, Elrond urges a pursuit of Sauron, to warn Gondor of his return that they must set up a watch on Mordor. Saruman denies it and instructs Elrond to take Galadriel back to Lothlórien, promising to pursue Sauron himself.

Voice dubbing actors
Foreign Language	Voice dubbing artist
The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power

Elrond under Khazad-dûm - TRoP
Elrond
Actor
Robert Aramayo
Titles
Herald for High King Gil-galad
Emissary to Khazad-dûm for Eregion
Commander
Occupations
Herald,
Speechwriter,
Emissary
Relationships
Eärendil (father)
Elros (brother)
Realms
Lindon
Race
Half-elves
Culture
Ñoldor
Age
Over 2000 years
Hair
Brown
Eyes
Grey-blue
First seen
"A Shadow of the Past"
"Elrond - When given the choice by higher powers to remain either a human or an elf, Elrond the half-elven chose immortality, whereas his brother Elros chose a mortal life and became the first King of Númenor. Greatness is in Elrond’s veins, but he has not yet totally found his place in the world. He must navigate the path between doing what is right for his kingdom and remaining loyal to those he holds most dear."
—Official description on Amazon.com
Elrond is a central character of Amazon Studios' series The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power, in which he is portrayed by Robert Aramayo.

Elrond, the Herald of High King Gil-galad, was first seen in a verdant glade, writing a speech for the king. Informed that his friend Galadriel has returned to Lindon from her expedition to Forodwaith, Elrond quickly went to meet her. Though elated to see her, Elrond soon informed her that Gil-galad did not approve of her recklessness in seeking to continue the search for Sauron, and warned her not to press any further. Thereafter Gil-galad chose to overlook her perceived insolence and honor her along with her companions in an ornate ceremony for their heroism, and even gifting them with the opportunity to return across the sea to Valinor. Elrond spoke to Galadriel afterwards and learned of her intention to refuse this offer, and counseled her to reconsider, and expressed his belief that the Enemy is gone. Galadriel did heed his counsel to take the ship to Valinor, though she changed her mind at the last moment.

Gil-galad soon afterwards tasked Elrond with a new mission: to work with the Elven-smith Celebrimbor on a new pursuit of great importance. Elrond accompanied Celebrimbor back to Ost-in-Edhil, the capital of Eregion. There, Celebrimbor revealed Elrond his grandfather Fëanor's hammer, and after reminiscing about the significance of Fëanor's work, declared his intention to create something of rivaling significance. This, he explained, would require a new forge, the likes of which the Elves had not the skill to make. Elrond opined that the Dwarves could create such a forge, and volunteered to journey to Khazad-dûm to attempt an alliance, on account of his friendship with its prince, Durin IV.

Celebrimbor went with Elrond to the Dwarf-city's West-gate, where the two were denied entry. Elrond alone gained entrance by resorting to challenging Durin through the Rite of Sigin-tarâg: a test of endurance undergone by breaking rocks with a hammer. Durin won, and gruffly attempted to escort Elrond out, at which point Elrond learned that the Dwarf's hostility was based out of Elrond's neglect to visit for the span of twenty years. Elrond convinced Durin to let him apologize to the Dwarf's family, and he met Durin's wife Disa, who insisted he stay for dinner. Through Disa' intercession, Durin made amends with Elrond and listened to the proposal he brought on Celebrimbor's behalf. The proposal was agreed to by the elder Durin, and soon construction on the great forge began.

Elrond returned to Ost-in-Edhil and conversed with Celebrimbor, who commented that Durin IV seemed to be avoiding him. Elrond shared the sentiment, and returned to Khazad-dûm, where he inquired of Disa as to Durin's whereabouts, only to be told the prince was mining quartz. Elrond suspected a ruse, and soon overheard Durin remarking to his wife on a secret excavation underneath the Mirrormere. Elrond discovered the entrance to the old mine and entered, where he was soon discovered by Durin, who was aggravated to be found out. Elrond mollified the Dwarf, and in exchange for a solemn oath of secrecy, was told the true nature of what was being mined. Durin revealed a small fragment of a new ore discovered by Disa, one that far surpassed other metals in strength and beauty. Elrond translated the description made by Durin into Sindarin, giving the metal its common name: mithril. Just then, a cave-in occurred, trapping four dwarf-miners. While waiting for news of the rescue operation, Elrond witnessed a somber song performed by Disa; a plea to the rocks to release the miners. Durin soon bore news that they had been rescued, though Durin III had shut down all mithril mining, greatly angering the prince. Elrond gently offered council to his friend, advising him to treasure the time he had left with his father.

At Elrond's invitation, Durin returned with him to Lindon at the behest of Gil-galad for a meeting intended to a solidify a new alliance between Elves and Dwarves. After the meeting, Elrond expressed frustration with Gil-galad, believing the king to have deceived him. To explain, Gil-galad had Elrond recount the Song of the Roots of Hithaeglir, which described the supposed origin of mithril, and showed him a black sickness that has begun to infect the trees of Lindon. Gil-galad attempted to make Elrond reveal the existence of mithril in Khazad-dûm, which he believed could undo the corruption and impending doom it brought for Elves, though Elrond refused because of his oath to Durin. Celebrimbor later elaborated after examining the mithril shard from Durin, reiterating the conviction that large quantities of mithril could bring salvation to the Elves. Elrond reluctantly revealed the entire gambit to Durin on the journey back to Khazad-dûm, and though skeptical, the Dwarf-prince agreed to ask his father.

Durin III allowed Elrond to make his proposal, in which Elrond offered the wood and game of Eriador for 500 years in exchange for access to mithril. The elder Durin refused, however, and the younger Durin bid a tearful farewell to Elrond before he witnessed the mithril fragment actually undo the corruption found on the leaf Elrond brought. Durin IV then took Elrond to the mithril mine to look for the metal, and while laboring confessed how he considered Elrond a brother. He attempted to share his secret name with Elrond, who told him to wait. Durin then broke through a wall to discover a shaft with enormous veins of mithril, just as Durin III found the clandestine operation and had Elrond thrown out of the kingdom.

Elrond then returned to Ost-in-Edhil to tell Celebrimbor that the plan had failed. Galadriel then arrived with the one called Halbrand, much to Elrond's surprise, and he learned of Galadriel leaping from the boat and her return to Middle-earth. After Halbrand recovered from a wound and began offering promising suggestions to Celebrimbor about how to amplify the small mithril fragment's light, Elrond convinced Gil-galad to give the Elven-smith three months to work on a solution. Many attempts are made, each growing closer, while Galadriel became suspicious of Halbrand. After she found a document proving that the line of Southland kings ended centuries ago, Halbrand revealed himself as Sauron to Galadriel, who became ensnared in a vision of Sauron's making. Elrond rescued her from drowning in the Glanduin, though she did not reveal Halbrand's identity and rushed to Celebrimbor, telling him to make three rings instead of the two Sauron had proposed. Celebrimbor did so, though just before the rings were complete, Elrond discovered the document Galadriel had found and realizes what she did, though he returned to find the Three Rings had been finished.

Video games
In The Lord of the Rings Online, Elrond makes his first appearance in the game if the player selects to play an Elf. Elrond is with the player as the Dwarves attack. He gives the character items that vary depending on the character's class. After this, he brings the player to another room where the player's master/teacher is waiting. After a brief tutorial battle between the player and the teacher Elrond tells the pair to go out to confront the enemy while he hides the relics sought by the Dwarves. Elrond next makes an appearance when the player's character returns to the shrine, just before it collapses on their former master. Elrond is outside and tries to comfort the player character, saying that "you can blame his death on me". He remarks on what they have just witnessed before the screen fades to black and the game advances in time by 600 years. Thereafter, Elrond is a frequent quest-giver and an active participant in game's story.
In The Lord of the Rings: Conquest, Elrond is a playable warrior in the instant action mod for Rivendell and the Hero Arena at the Black Gate. He has a long elvish blade and an elvish throwing axe, similar to the other Elven warriors. Tsunami Blade, River of Bruinen, and Water Sphere are his special abilities. He is the narrator for both campaigns. In the evil campaign, Elrond is seen during the Rivendell mission. He can be killed by Uruk-hai, or by Sauron himself. It is said that Elrond is a king, and the player must obtain his ring of power after his death. However, at the end, he returns and must be killed again, together with Legolas.
In The Battle for Middle-earth II, Elrond is a hero of the Elf faction. His powers include two healing spells: Athelas, which heals himself and all nearby heroes, and a magical spell which restores heroes' health and abilities. His most powerful spell is a whirlwind (possibly an allusion to Elrond's ring of air), which can be used to sweep the map and instantly wreak havoc upon attacking units. He is the narrator for both of the campaigns, as he does in Conquest. In the Good Campaign, Elrond is playable in the first mission, where the player must defend Rivendell. He is also playable during the last mission, when the player must destroy the fortress of Dol Guldur. In the Evil Campaign, he must be killed in the last mission at Rivendell.
In the 1994 SNES game J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Volume 1, the player can talk to Elrond and give him the six amulets for leveling up the player's units. Elrond will say to bring the Ring through Moria to Lothlórien, where it will be safe from Sauron.
In the 2002 Playstation, Xbox, PC and Gameboy Advance game The Lord of the Rings: Fellowship of the Ring, Elrond makes a cameo at the Council of Elrond.