Title: Eönwë  
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/E%C3%B6nw%C3%AB

Eönwë
Eönwë (Quenya; IPA: eˈon) was a Maia serving Manwë as his herald and banner-bearer, and Chief of the Maiar along with Ilmarë. His name should be pronounced as ay-on-way.

Biography
Eönwë was referred to as the "greatest of arms in Arda," meaning that he was the best with weapons, but as one of the Maiar he was not necessarily the most powerful in might. When Eärendil reached the shores of Aman to make his appeal, it was Eönwë who first greeted him outside of Tirion praising his arrival and accomplishments. When Manwë decided to heed the appeal, Eönwë was sent to Middle-earth to fight the War of Wrath, leading the Host of the Valar.

When Morgoth was defeated, Eönwë took the two remaining Silmarils and held them for safekeeping. The two remaining Sons of Fëanor took them and fled, yet Eönwë did not let them be slain, hoping they would see the folly of their ways. After the War of Wrath, Sauron emerged from hiding and approached Eönwë seeking forgiveness, but Eönwë did not have the authority to pardon him alone, and told him he would have to return to the Valar to receive judgment, but Sauron fled from him instead.

Eönwë also possessed great wisdom and taught the remaining Edain many things, enriching them with great knowledge before the raising of Númenor.

Etymology
Earlier names

Although the name Eönwë does not have any particular meaning in either Quenya or Sindarin, his earlier name Fionwë translates to "Son", from fion and the suffix -wë, an old word for "person", deriving from the stem from EWE. This possibly alludes to his previous conception as the son of Manwë. It should be pronounced as fi-on-way.

His other name, Úrion, means "He of the Sun", from ur ("the Sun"), uru ("fire") or urin ("blazing"), and the masculine suffix -ion. It should be pronounced as oo-rai-on.

In other versions
In earlier conceptions of the legendarium, Eönwë (called Fionwë Úrion), was envisioned as the brother of Ilmarë (called Erinti) and the son of Manwë and Varda, both called with the title of Wanwavoisi. In some versions, Eönwë is the one who will kill Morgoth for his love for Arien (called Urwendi).

At some point in the legendarium, Nornorë served as the herald of Manwë, but it is not clear if Eönwë replaced Nornorë or they may have served at the same time.

