Title: Finrod Felagund
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Finrod

Finrod Felagund
Finrod, known fully as Finrod Felagund, was a Ñoldor Elf who was born in Aman. He was King of Nargothrond and the eldest son of Finarfin and Eärwen, and the brother of Galadriel, Angrod and Aegnor.Finrod was one of the noblest Elves of the House of Finarfin and a friend of Men. His nobility, death saving Beren, and opposition to the Oath of Fëanor allowed for his return to life in Valinor, making him the first Elf to be reincarnated in the Undying Lands before the end of the First Age.

Biography

Finrod was friendly with Turgon and the House of Fingolfin. He opposed Fëanor and the Oath when he sought to return to Middle-earth to recover the Silmarils from Morgoth, but chose not to be parted with his friends and so he followed his father and his House and the House of Fingolfin. Finrod did not fight in the Kinslaying of Alqualondë nor was he aware of it as he continued the transit through Araman. While marching up the coast, the host encountered a figure on a rock and heard the Prophecy of the North. Afterwards, Finarfin and many of his followers departed and returned to Tirion, but Finrod chose to continue onto Middle-earth with the host of Fingolfin.
Finrod founded the original Minas Tirith in the Pass of Sirion. In around FA 50, he and his friend Turgon, while journeying down the river Sirion, encamped along its banks and were put to sleep by Ulmo. While asleep, Ulmo revealed to them the hidden caves of Nargothrond and the Vale of Tumladen. Finrod discovered the system of caves beneath the Taur-en-Faroth, and with the help from the Dwarves of the Blue Mountains he started to build the city of Nargothrond and went on to found his own kingdom there.Finrod rewarded the Dwarves with many jewels from Valinor. And in that time they made for him the Nauglamír and gave him the honorific Felagund meaning "Hewer of Caves".

While hunting in the lands of Thargelion in East Beleriand, Finrod was first of the Ñoldor to come across Men. He stayed with them long, learning their language and teaching them Sindarin. He also intervened on behalf of the Laiquendi of Ossiriand, who feared Men would destroy their home, and he received the permission of King Thingol, who held overlordship over all Beleriand, to guide the Men to Estolad.
Finrod had a close friendship with Andreth of the House of Bëor, whom he often visited during the Siege of Angband to discuss matters of Elves and Men. One such conversation was written down, later known as Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth.

During the Dagor Bragollach, Barahir of the House of Bëor saved Finrod's life, and in friendship Finrod gave him his ring.This ring was later known as the Ring of Barahir and was eventually handed down to Aragorn when told of his true identity. Years after the Dagor Bragollach, Barahir's son Beren came to Nargothrond seeking help, and Finrod went with him on the Quest for the Silmaril to repay his debt, laying down his kingship. Celegorm and Curufin, who were living in Nargothrond at the time, persuaded (using fear of Morgoth, and barely veiled threats related to their Oath) most of Nargothrond to stay behind; only ten warriors, headed by one, Edrahil, were faithful and accompanied their King.
Though disguised by the arts of Finrod, the twelve were captured by Sauron and taken to Tol-in-Gaurhoth, formerly Minas Tirith, the castle Felagund himself had built. Finrod and Sauron battled with songs of power but despite a great display of skill and power by the Elven prince, Sauron eventually caught him in a devious trap and prevailed. But Sauron could not discern who exactly they were, even though they were revealed to him. Sauron imprisoned them, seeking to learn their errand and identities, sending a werewolf to devour them one by one until they revealed their secret, yet none did. Sauron however perceived that Finrod was a High Elven Lord of great power, and purposed to save him for last. Eventually, when the wolf came for Beren, Finrod burst his chains and killed the wolf barehanded but was mortally wounded himself.
Finrod loved Amarië, a Vanyarin Elf, who did not follow him to Middle-earth. For this, though she and Finrod were betrothed, Finrod never married while in Middle-earth.It is noted in the Lay of Lúthien that Finrod was soon allowed to return to life in Valinor and "now dwells with Amarië" and was described as walking "with Finarfin his father beneath the trees in Eldamar".Even though Mandos foretold that any of the exiles who died would never be allowed to leave his halls, Finrod alone was allowed to reembody in Valinor.

"...They buried the body of Felagund upon the hill-top of his own isle, and it was clean again; and the green grave of Finrod Finarfin's son, fairest of all the princes of the Elves, remained inviolate, until the land was changed and broken, and foundered under destroying seas. But Finrod walks with Finarfin his father beneath the trees in Eldamar." - The Silmarillion

Etymology
The name Finrod is a Sindarin form of his Telerin (Quenya) name Findaráto, with the approximate meaning "Mighty descendant of Finwë". His mother name is Ingoldo ("the Ñoldo").

Felagund is an Epessë given to him by the Dwarves that expanded the caves of Nargothrond. It is actually of Dwarvish origin (or Sindarized Khuzdûl) from the word felak-gundu ("Hewer of Caves").

Finrod was also called by Bëor and his people Nóm ('Wisdom'), Nómin ('the Wise'), and "Friend-of-Men", which in Elvish was Edennil and Atandil, Sindarin and Quenya respectively.

Titles
King of Nargothrond
Felagund
Earlier names
In The History of Middle-earth, is told that the earlier name for Finrod was Inglor Felagund, while Men called him Sômar or Vidri, both meaning 'Wisdom'.

House of Finarfin
The Heraldic Device of the House of FinarfinThe Heraldic Device of King Finrod of NargothrondThe Heraldic Device of High King Gil-galad

Finwë	
 	 
 	 
Indis
 	 
Fingolfin	
 	 
 	 
Finarfin	
 	 
 	 
Eärwen
 	 
Finrod	
 	 
 	 
Angrod	
 	 
 	 
Eðellos	
 	 
 	 
Aegnor	
 	 
 	 
Galadriel	
 	 
 	 
Celeborn
 	 
Orodreth		 
Celebrían
	 
Finduilas	

Gil-galad


In other versions
In earlier versions of the Middle-earth mythology, and the first edition of The Lord of the Rings, the name Finrod was given to the character later known as Finarfin. Finrod Felagund was then named "Inglor Felagund". Because of that, some people speculate that Gildor Inglorion was Finrod's son, but there is much evidence to the contrary, which is found on the page for Gildor Inglorion.

In The Silmarillion, Orodreth is Finrod's brother. This was an editorial decision by Christopher Tolkien and an admitted mistake. Orodreth was actually the son of Angrod and thus Finrod's nephew.

In adaptations
The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power

Finrod is portrayed in The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power (2022) by Will Fletcher. He appears in the series' prologue sequence, giving counsel to his younger sister Galadriel when she is a child. Thereafter he is shown to have fought in the war waged against Morgoth. After Morgoth's defeat, he began hunting Sauron, though he was killed by servants of Sauron in "a place of darkness and despair". This leads Galadriel to take on his mission and his dagger, which she uses throughout this endeavor until sacrificing it to be melted down in order to forge the Three Rings of the Elves. Shortly before this, Sauron takes on the appearance of Finrod in a vision to Galadriel as he attempts to sway her to his side.