Title: Frodo Baggins
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Frodo_Baggins

Frodo Baggins

"I will take the Ring, though I do not know the way."
—Frodo Baggins, at the Council of Elrond, in The Fellowship of the Ring
Frodo Baggins was a hobbit of the Shire in the late Third Age. He was a key figure in the Quest of Mount Doom, in which he bore the One Ring to Mount Doom, where it was destroyed. He was a Ring-bearer, best friend to his gardener, Samwise Gamgee, and was one of three hobbits who sailed from Middle-earth to the Uttermost West at the end of the Third Age.

Biography
Childhood
Much of Frodo's youth was spent at Brandy Hall in Buckland, the ancestral home of the Brandybuck family, including his mother (Primula Brandybuck). Frodo was known as something of a rascal, befriending Meriadoc (Merry) Brandybuck and Peregrin (Pippin) Took and causing trouble wherever they went. They would often steal mushrooms from Farmer Maggot's farm Bamfurlong.

In TA 2980, when Frodo was only 12 years old, his parents drowned in a boating accident on the Brandywine River. An only child, Frodo stayed in Brandy Hall until his 99-year-old "uncle" Bilbo, his father's second cousin, adopted him in TA 2989. Bilbo took Frodo to live with him in his home at Bag End and made him his heir.

The two grew very close in the following years; Frodo, treated by his adopted guardian as he were his own son, learned much of the Elvish language during his time with Bilbo, as well as much of the lore of Middle-earth. They also had a weekly tradition of taking long walking trips together from Hobbiton to Michel Delving and Buckland; all throughout the Shire. The two shared the same birthday, September 22 by Shire Reckoning (around September 12–14 of our calendar), and a party of special magnificence was held when Frodo came of age of thirty-three and Bilbo achieved the notable age of 111.

Bilbo gave a memorable birthday speech before playing a joke on his fellow hobbits by using the One Ring to disappear, at which Gandalf quickly reacted and used his staff to create a blinding flash where Bilbo had been standing. The hobbits at the party were left confused and disgruntled, and Bilbo was never again seen in the Shire.

Before departing for his journey to Rivendell, Bilbo was persuaded by Gandalf to voluntarily surrender the One Ring. Bilbo left it on the fireplace mantel with a note for Frodo, who would now become the next Ring-bearer.

Coming of age & flight from the Shire
After the party finished, Frodo returned home and discovered that he was now the master of Bag End and the recipient of Bilbo's magic Ring. Gandalf, ever more curious about the Ring's origin, power, and purpose (but not yet positive it was the One Ring), advised the young hobbit against the using the Ring. For the next seventeen years, Frodo complied with the wizard's request and hid the Ring in a safe place. However, on April 12, 3018, Gandalf returned to Bag End and warned Frodo that the Ring was actually the One Ring, which the Dark Lord Sauron needed to rule over Middle-earth. Realizing that Sauron would be looking for the Ring, Gandalf advised the Hobbit to secretly follow Bilbo's journey to Rivendell.

After Frodo's discussion with Gandalf, a rumor started that he was running out of money. This rumor, though not begun by Frodo, was encouraged by him. Merry helped Frodo to purchase a small house at Crickhollow. With the exception of his gardener Sam Gamgee, who had agreed to accompany him to Rivendell, Frodo told the other Hobbits of the Shire that he intended to move to Buckland. He sold his home to the Sackville-Bagginses, and, on the September 23, 3018, the day after his fiftieth birthday, Frodo left from Bag End, taking with him Sam and Pippin. They left in the early morning for Bree, and just in time, as Sauron's most powerful servants, the nine Nazgûl, had entered the Shire dressed as Black Riders searching for a hobbit with the name of Baggins.

To Bree
Frodo was nearly captured by a Black Rider on the road, but was saved by Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod, whom he asked for advice. Leaving the roads to cut across country, Frodo and Sam reached Farmer Maggot's farm, who helped them to evade the Riders. Meeting Merry at Bucklebury Ferry, they saw a Rider tracking them from the bank they'd departed from. On arrival at Crickhollow, Frodo found that Merry and Pippin already knew about his "secret" journey. Frodo was left with no alternative but to bring the two youngsters with him. They cut through the Old Forest and the Barrow-downs in hopes of losing the Black Riders, which did succeed. They met other troubles in those places though, at the hands of Old Man Willow and the Barrow-wights, but were rescued twice by Tom Bombadil, a mysterious being who dwelt in a glade in the middle of the Old Forest.

Strider

In Bree, the hobbits stayed at The Prancing Pony, an old inn. Frodo went by the name of Mr Underhill, attempting to raise as little suspicion as possible. When he noticed a mysteriously cloaked Man sitting in the shadows and smoking a long-stemmed pipe, Frodo asked the innkeeper, Barliman Butterbur, who the man was. The innkeeper referred to the man, a Ranger, as Strider.

That night, Black Riders arrived in Bree and attacked the inn in search of Frodo and the One Ring, but Strider had managed to hide the Hobbits from them in time. Having gained their trust, Strider introduced himself as Aragorn to Frodo and the others, to whom he also revealed the backstory of the black riders, also called Nazgûl or Ringwraiths. With a pony named Bill that the Hobbits had acquired at Bree, Strider led Frodo and his companions into the Wild. Aragorn would be their guide to Rivendell, and he would lead them through the Midgewater Marshes and to the hill of Weathertop.

Weathertop
On the night of October the sixth, the Hobbits were attacked by five of the nine Ringwraiths at Weathertop. In the presence of the Nazgûl, Frodo made the mistake of putting on the Ring. He was able to resist their attempt to take him by drawing his sword and invoking the name of one of the Valar, Elbereth Gilthoniel. Unfortunately, the leader of the Nazgûl, the Witch-king of Angmar, stabbed Frodo in the shoulder (he would have stabbed his heart) with a Morgul-knife. If it had caught him in the heart, Frodo would have become like the Nazgûl, only weaker and under their control. The Ringwraiths were driven away by the appearance of Aragorn and his martial skill; also because he had torches, one of their few weaknesses.

Though Aragorn was a skilled healer, he could not heal Frodo's wound. A fragment of the Ringwraith's blade remained in Frodo's flesh, where it continued to move towards his heart. Near death (or worse), Frodo was rescued by Glorfindel, an Elf-lord, who put the injured Hobbit upon his horse Asfaloth. They were found and pursued by the Nazgûl, as Glorfindel rode and bore Frodo swiftly to the Ford of Bruinen, at the entrance to the valley of Rivendell. Once they had crossed the River Bruinen, the Nine Ringwraiths behind them demanded Frodo give up the Ring, but Frodo refused. Subsequently, the Ringwraiths entered the river and were washed away in a flood called up by Elrond.

Frodo was soon healed in Rivendell by Elrond, who knew the wound would not ultimately leave him, as it was both spiritual and physical. On the 24th of October 3018, Frodo awoke in Rivendell and was reunited with Bilbo, Gandalf, Aragorn, Sam, Merry, and Pippin. Although Elrond had healed his wound, it continued to ail him yearly for as long as he lived in Middle-earth.

Quest of the Ring
Council of Elrond

After his healing, Frodo was summoned to a great Council that Elrond had organized. Representatives of all the Free Peoples of Middle-earth discussed the history of the Rings of Power and decided that the One Ring must be destroyed. As the Ring was shown and tempers flared, argument broke out as to who should carry the Ring on this mission, until Frodo bravely volunteered to take the Ring to Mordor and cast it into the fires of Mount Doom. A member of each of the Free Peoples offered to join Frodo in his quest, thus forming the Fellowship of the Ring.

The Fellowship consisted of Frodo, Samwise, Merry, Pippin, Aragorn, Gandalf, Boromir of Gondor, Legolas of the Woodland Realm, and Gimli of the Lonely Mountain. Before leaving Rivendell, Bilbo gave Frodo his dwarf-made coat of mithril mail and his elven blade Sting. The mithril coat had been given to Bilbo by Thorin Oakenshield during the events of The Hobbit, and Sting had been taken by Bilbo from a Trolls' lair. On December 25, the Fellowship of the Ring departed from Rivendell and headed south.

Moria

After an attack by White Wolves in Eregion, on January 11, 3019, the Fellowship attempted to cross the Misty Mountains (specifically the Pass of Caradhras), but were unable to due to a snowstorm. They instead traveled through the underground city of Moria at the urging of Gimli.

Some days in into their dangerous trek through Moria, the Fellowship entered the Chamber of Mazarbul, and was attacked by Orcs and a cave-troll. Frodo helped to defeat the troll before he was stabbed by an Orc captain, his mithril-shirt saving him from a deadly blow. The Fellowship then ran from there to the Bridge of Khazad-dum, at which Gandalf dueled Durin's Bane and fell. Once outside Moria, while the Fellowship was grieving, Gimli took Frodo and Sam to look upon the Mirrormere, even in their great hurry.

Lothlórien

Deeply grieved by their loss, the Fellowship journeyed to the Elven kingdom of Lothlórien, where they met the Lady Galadriel and Lord Celeborn. Galadriel showed Frodo a vision of the future in her Mirror. Frodo offered her the One Ring, but she resisted the temptation to take it, passing the test that was laid before her, and accepting the diminishing of the power of the Elves. Before the Fellowship departed from Lothlórien, Galadriel gave each member a gift. To Frodo, she gave a phial with the light of the star Eärendil captured inside; this gift would prove hugely important later on in the quest. They were also provided with elven way-bread, other supplies, and boats for their voyage down the Anduin River.

The Breaking of the Fellowship

The Fellowship continued their journey south to Parth Galen. There, Boromir, a Gondorian and a member of the Fellowship, attempted to convince Frodo to bring the Ring to Minas Tirith and regroup from there. When the hobbit asked for an hour alone to consider his options, Boromir followed him. Seeing that Frodo did not intend to take the suggested course of action, Boromir tried to take the Ring from him by force.

Frodo put on the Ring and escaped to the Seat of Seeing, where he watched as war brewed across Middle-earth and the Eye of Sauron searching for him as he traveled. He was nearly spotted, but the Dark Lord's attention was drawn away by a resurrected Gandalf.

Taking off the Ring, he decided to take the item to Mordor alone, without telling the other members of the Fellowship. However, he was joined by his friend Samwise Gamgee, who felt it was necessary that he should protect and guide Frodo. Frodo gave in to Sam's protests, and although reluctant to lead anyone else to his fate, was glad to have Sam's company.

The two hobbits continued toward Mordor, dividing the Fellowship. Meanwhile, Boromir was killed by Uruk-archers while defending Merry and Pippin; the two young hobbits were then captured by Uruk-hai, and were to be taken to Isengard. Instead of following Samwise and Frodo to Mordor, the Three Hunters, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli, decided it more important to rescue Merry and Pippin from their captors. The breaking of the Fellowship was now complete.

Emyn Muil

After leaving what remained of the Fellowship at Amon Hen, Frodo and Sam tried to navigate through the winding paths and razor sharp rocks of the Emyn Muil. After getting lost several times, they were found by Gollum, who at first tried to take the One Ring, but was captured by Sam (with Frodo's help) and tied up with the Elven rope. Frodo, now pitying the creature, decided not to slay Gollum, but forced him to swear an oath of servitude to the master of the precious. Gollum then led them out of the maze and into the Dead Marshes.

The Dead Marshes

The Dead Marshes lay to the south of Emyn Muil, and were just as disorienting, if not more so. There was thought to be no route through the marshes, as Orcs marched for miles around, although Gollum had secretly discovered a path when traveling. He led Frodo and Sam on a safe pathway through the marshes, warning them not to follow what seemed like small torches in the water.

Soon after Frodo, Samwise, and Gollum entered the Dead Marshes, a Nazgûl flew over them on a Black Wing, looking for the Ring. Gollum had led the two hobbits to a safe place that they could hide in.

Ithilien
Gollum led the two Hobbits to the Black Gate of Mordor, as Frodo had desired, but stopped the Hobbits from passing its doors, as the danger was too great. He then explained about a secret way into Mordor, 'Up the stairs and through the tunnel'. The Hobbits once again found themselves being led by Gollum. After venturing into Ithilien, and witnessing a skirmish between a company of Haradrim warriors (along with Oliphaunts) and Rangers from Gondor, they were apprehended by the Ranger's captain, Faramir. When the skirmish had ended, Faramir blindfolded the ring-bearer and his companions and led them to Henneth Annûn, the Window on the West. Upon much interrogation, Sam foolishly misspoke, and gave away that Frodo was indeed carrying the One Ring. Realizing the importance of the quest, Faramir proved his quality, unlike his brother, Boromir, and let the Ring-bearer go free, resupplying the hobbits with food for their journey. Later, Gollum was captured in the Forbidden Pool and forcibly taken into the hidden lair. Frodo begged for his safety, and he was not killed, although the rift between master and servant had once again begun to open.

Minas Morgul and Shelob's Lair
Gollum led the hobbits past the lair of the Witch-king of Angmar, Minas Morgul, and up the Stairs of Cirith Ungol into 'The Tunnel'. When they arrived at the top though, they were abandoned by Gollum, causing them to realize that Gollum had betrayed them. They cautiously traveled through the tunnel, and managed to get to the end only to find their way barred by Shelob's great web. Whilst attempting to cut through the webbing, Frodo bravely stood up to Shelob and forced her back further into the tunnels giving him and Sam time enough to hack through the threads and escape. Upon escaping the tunnels, Frodo thought himself safe; however, Shelob, through one of her many tunnels, managed to sneak out and jab him with her stinger. As he was being encased in Shelob's webbing, Sam was able to draw her into single combat wherein he, using Sting and the Phial of Galadriel, was able to mortally wound her and drive her back into her caves. Sam took the Ring from around Frodo's neck upon hearing Orcish voices, and hid behind some nearby rocks. He overheard the Orcs speaking of Frodo, and Sam realized that his master was not dead, but merely paralyzed. Frodo was then taken to the Tower of Cirith Ungol to await further torture and questioning.

Cirith Ungol
Frodo was imprisoned on the highest floor of the Tower. He was stripped of all his clothes and possessions. Fighting broke out amongst the two lead Orcs and their battalions from squabbling over claim of the mithril vest - in this violence almost all Orcs and Uruks in the tower died. Sam soon arrived at the gate of the Tower, only to find his way blocked by the Two Watchers; he eventually overcame them, entered the tower, finding and rescuing his master. They descended and fled the tower, having to pass the Watchers again (this time, destroying them), and entered Mordor.

Mordor and Mount Doom
Frodo and Sam crawled onward through the plains of Mordor, which lay vacant as many hosts of Orcs were sent to the Black Gate to meet the Men of the West's army, and, after falling in and out of one such company of Orcs, started to climb Mount Doom. They journeyed on for days with little food or water, and Frodo became progressively weaker as the Ring's power over him grew the closer they drew to Orodruin. Frodo was eventually unable to go on, and Sam was forced to carry him a fair distance. It was then that Gollum reappeared, and, after a brief struggle, Sam cut Gollum in the stomach while Frodo fled up the mountain to its entrance.

Inside the Cracks of Doom, Frodo finally had the chance to destroy the Ring and relieve his burden, but the Ring's power was at its strongest due to the surroundings where it had been created. Frodo finally yielded to the temptation and power of the Ring. Sam yelled for Frodo to destroy it, but Frodo, overcome by its power, claimed the Ring for himself aloud. Gollum attacked Sam, who fell and hit his head on a rock, temporarily knocking him unconscious. When he regained consciousness, he saw Gollum fighting with an invisible Frodo. Gollum bit off Frodo's finger that wore the Ring, causing Frodo great pain, and he was reunited with his treasure for a short time, until, dancing with joy, he toppled off the brink and fell into the lava, destroying himself and the One Ring.

The two hobbits tried to escape as Mount Doom erupted. In the very moment that they believed themselves doomed, Gwaihir the Lord of Eagles saw them, and, with his Eagle companions Landroval and Meneldor, rescued Sam and Frodo, and flew them westward, out of Mordor to safety.

End of the War
The Scouring of the Shire
After recovering at the Field of Cormallen and witnessing the crowning of Aragorn as King Elessar, Frodo, Sam, Merry, and Pippin all returned to the Shire. Arriving, they found it under the control of one Sharkey (later revealed to be Saruman) and his forces. Saruman was ruling the Shire from Bag End, although he was later murdered by Gríma Wormtongue. Frodo, Sam, Merry, and Pippin, however, started to gather all Shirriffs and townsfolk of the Shire, and they successfully defeated of Saruman's Ruffians at the Battle of Bywater.

Frodo was not directly involved in the fighting at the Battle of Bywater; instead, he made sure that no hobbits were harmed (saying that no Hobbit had ever intentionally harmed another in the Shire, and that this would stay true), and also that any Ruffians that surrendered were not harmed.

Close of the Third Age
Following the Scouring of the Shire and end of the War of the Ring in November, Frodo went on to serve as Deputy Mayor of the Shire. During his brief tenure of six months, he helped lead the rebuilding of the Shire, but soon realized that he still bore the wounds of his quest. On May 1st, TA 3020, Frodo attended the wedding of his best friend Sam and his wife Rosie Cotton and they moved in with him at Bag End. On mid-years day later that year, Frodo retired from his post as Deputy Mayor, letting the office revert to Will Whitfoot, who Frodo held place for as he recovered from his wounds and imprisonment by Saruman.

During his last days in middle-earth, he tried to live as peacefully as possible. Frodo was still troubled by his shoulder wound, which pained him on each anniversary of the attack at Weathertop, in addition to falling sick on each anniversary of being stung by Shelob. As such, October 6th of that year, he would suffer from his wounds again. March 13th, TA 3021 brought similar ailments, Frodo being ill from his stinging. While living with Sam and Rosie he would witness the birth of their oldest daughter Elanor twelve days later. Prior to departing Middle-earth, he also wrote his own story "The Lord of the Rings" along with Bilbo's "There and Back Again" in the Red Book of Westmarch.

On September 22, TA 3021 (Third Age), at the age of 53, Frodo joined Bilbo, Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel aboard the White Ship at the Grey Havens. He was allowed passage across the sea to the Undying Lands, as he was a Ring-bearer, with the hope of healing the damage to his spirit that bearing the Ring had caused.

Fourth Age
During the Fourth Age, Frodo spent his last days on Tol Eressëa in "a period of reflection and peace", attempting to understand his place in Arda, having been given the opportunity as he healed from the trauma afflicted upon him due to his quest during the War of the Ring.

In the year FA 61, fellow Ring-bearer Samwise Gamgee, sailed to the Undying Lands, possibly reuniting with Frodo, assuming he was still alive.

Characteristics
Frodo, as described by Gandalf, was "taller than some and fairer than most," with "a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye."  He had thick, curly brown hair like most other hobbits, and had lighter-than-usual skin due to his Fallohide ancestry through his Brandybuck mother. He could be described as fairly good looking for a hobbit. Frodo is described as appearing thirty-three, even when he is fifty, due to the influence of the Ring. Bilbo and Frodo shared a common birthday on September 22, but Bilbo was 78 years Frodo's senior. At the opening of The Fellowship of the Ring, Frodo and Bilbo were celebrating their thirty-third and eleventy-first (111th) birthdays, respectively. Frodo, like Bilbo, was considered by many others in Hobbiton to be a little odd. His curiosity of the outside world, fascination with Elves and faraway places (like those to which Bilbo traveled in The Hobbit) did not fit the general content personality of most Hobbits. This curiosity was also attributed to his Took ancestry. He was very kind and compassionate, pitying Gollum and allowing him to guide him and Sam to Mordor despite Sam's distrust of the creature. This act of kindness later proved to be a factor in the quest's success in destroying the Ring.

Frodo Baggins
Attire
Frodo was dressed in typical Hobbit-fashion when he left the Shire: knee breeches, shirt, waistcoat, jacket, and cloak. Colors such as bright green and yellow were typical for Shire-folk. He was unarmed, save for a pocketknife.

When his little group was waylaid by Barrow-wights, he lost his summer-weight clothing and was wearing a burial shrift when rescued by Tom Bombadil. When their pack-ponies returned, he was forced to put on heavier woollen clothing intended for colder weather. The Hobbits found several long Dúnedain daggers in the wight's treasure. These served as short-swords for the Hobbits, but Frodo's was broken when he resisted the Witch-king at Weathertop. At Imladris, he removed his Hobbit clothing upon finding new Elven clothes that fitted him perfectly. Therefore, throughout his quest, he wore a green silk tunic, trousers together with cloaks made of fur for the first stages of the quest, and then towards Mordor he shed them to wear his tunic and trousers in the warmer weather. Later, his uncle Bilbo gave him both Sting, a magic Elven dagger, and a coat of mithril chain mail. The mail saved his life twice, first when it deflected a spear-point in the Mines of Moria, and second when it turned aside the dagger that Saruman used to try and kill him.

As with the other members of the Fellowship of the Ring, Frodo received a special cloak from Galadriel in Lórien, which allowed him to blend in with natural surroundings. Upon being betrayed by Gollum and captured by Orcs at Cirith Ungol, Frodo lost all of his clothing and most of his possessions. Sam Gamgee saved Sting, however. After the two tribes of Orcs had slain each other in the tower of Cirith Ungol, Frodo dressed himself in Orc-garb. This successfully fooled the Mordor-Orcs they encountered, but he dropped the Orc mail and helmet as he and Sam approached Mount Doom.

In other versions
When J.R.R. Tolkien first conceived of the character, he christened him Bingo Bolger-Baggins; for he thought that Lord of the Rings was going to be a children's book, but then soon decided that it was far too 'silly' of a name for The Lord of the Rings, which was an increasingly more serious topic.

In adaptations

Ralph Bakshi's The Lord of the Rings
Christopher Guard voiced Frodo in Ralph Bakshi's 1978 The Lord of the Rings film, with Sharon Baird doing the modeling.

Rankin/Bass

Orson Bean voiced Frodo in the Rankin/Bass The Return of the King film, the same actor who portrayed Bilbo in The Hobbit and in The Return of the King.

The Lord of the Rings film trilogy
Frodo is portrayed in The Lord of the Rings film trilogy by Elijah Wood. There are several differences between Peter Jackson's film trilogy and the original story. In the movies, Frodo seems to have owned the Ring for only a few days or perhaps a few months before Gandalf returned, as opposed to the seventeen years of the book. Frodo never sells Bag End, but sets out early next morning with Sam. Merry and Pippin run into the pair at the farm of Farmer Maggot and are pulled into the journey. The Hobbits are pursued by the Black Riders all the way to Bucklebury Ferry on the borders of Buckland. There the Black Riders are forced to ride to the Brandywine Bridge while the Hobbits make for Bree. The movies remove several parts of the journey as well. These include their encounters with the High Elves, Farmer Maggot, and Tom Bombadil, as well as their visit to Buckland, the Old Forest, and the Barrow-downs.

Arwen, Elrond's daughter, leads Frodo to Rivendell instead of Glorfindel. The Cave-troll inflicts the wound on Frodo in Moria, instead of the Orc captain. In the novel, Faramir declared right from the first that he wanted no part of the One Ring, but in the film Faramir at first follows what he believes is his duty to bring the Ring back to Minas Tirith. But while travelling with Frodo, Sam, and Gollum through the city of Osgiliath, the city is attacked by a Nazgûl and the forces of Mordor, and Faramir realizes he should not take the Ring after he sees the effect it has on Frodo.

Video games

Frodo appears in many video games:

J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Volume 1 (1994) SNES by Interplay. The main playable character.
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2002) by WXP and Sierra (voiced by Steve Staley, playable)
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002) by Stormfront Studios and Electronic Arts (voiced by Elijah Wood)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003) by EA Redwood Shores and EA (voiced by Elijah Wood, playable)
The Lord of the Rings: War in the North (2011) by Snowblind Studios and Warner Bros. Interactive (cameo appearance)
LEGO The Lord of the Rings: The Video Game
Frodo is a primary character in EA's The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth (2004), and in The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II (2005), he can only be temporarily summoned with the Summon Hobbits power, available to factions of good in Skirmish mode.
In The Lord of the Rings Online, (2007), Frodo is first met in Rivendell, preparing for departure. Later, he is found on Cerin Amroth in Lothlórien, weary from the loss of Gandalf. From Amon Hen onwards, player experiences Frodo's journey in a series of Session Plays, alternatively playing as either Frodo, Sam or Gollum. The player meets Frodo again at the Field of Cormallen, he later gives a speech to Aragorn and Arwen. A Hobbit actor portrays Frodo Baggins in a Hobbit-made theater play "The Disappearance of Mad Baggins". Notably, the player is not told about Frodo's mission for a very long time, with Elrond, Gandalf, Aragorn and others only saying that it is "of great importance".
Radio
Oliver Burt voiced the character in the 1956 BBC Radio radio adaptation of The Lord of the Rings.
James Arrington voiced the character in the 1979 The Mind's Eye radio adaptation of The Lord of the Rings.
Ian Holm (who later portrayed Bilbo in The Lord of the Rings film trilogy) voiced the character in the 1981 BBC Radio serial of The Lord of the Rings.
Nigel Planer voiced the character in Tales from the Perilous Realm (1992 radio series).
Matthias Haase voiced the character in the 1991-1992 German radio serial adaptation of The Lord of the Rings.
Dušan Cinkota voiced the character in the 2001 first season and Ľuboš Kostelný in the 2002 second season and 2003 third season of the 2001-2003 three-season Slovak radio serial adaptation of The Lord of the Rings.
Parodies
Frodo was portrayed by Lauren Lopez in a parody of The Lord of the Rings by the group Team Starkid.

Elijah Wood reprised his role in an AT&T streaming app commercial, wherein, shortly after a request was made to see The Lord of the Rings, Frodo requests the streaming app to play his music from the Shire playlist. As with the other people in the ad, only his mouth is actually seen.