Title: Galadriel
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Galadriel

Galadriel
"Very tall they were, and the Lady no less tall than the Lord; and they were grave and beautiful. They were clad wholly in white; and the hair of the Lady was of deep gold… but no sign of age was upon them, unless it were in the depths of their eyes; for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet profound, the wells of deep memory."
—The Fellowship of the Ring, "The Mirror of Galadriel"
Galadriel was the Ñoldorin Lady of the woods of Lothlórien who witnessed Middle-earth during the three Ages of Awakening.

Galadriel was born in Aman as one of the Ñoldor. She was the daughter of Finarfin and Eärwen, and younger sister of Finrod, Angrod, and Aegnor She took part in the Exile of the Ñoldor, following Fëanor in his rebellion. However, she opposed the Kinslaying at Alqualondë and crossed the Helcaraxë with the rest of Fingolfin's followers. After arriving in Beleriand, she lived mainly in Doriath, where she befriended Melian. Later, with her husband Celeborn, she ruled over the woodland Elves of Lothlórien, and together they had a daughter, Celebrían, who married Elrond.

She is described as "the mightiest and fairest of all the Elves that remained in Middle-earth" and the "greatest of Elven women" Throughout the Third Age it was unknown who wielded the Three Rings but during the War of the Ring, Galadriel revealed to Frodo Baggins that she was the bearer of Nenya After the War, she returned to the Uttermost West.

History
Elder Days
Life in Aman
Galadriel was born in Eldamar in the year 1362 of the Trees of the First Age. She was the fourth child of Finarfin, prince of the Ñoldor, who named her Artanis. Her mother was Eärwen, princess of the Falmari, who named her Nerwen. Galadriel grew beautiful and tall, even for the women of the Ñoldor. Being strong of body, will, and mind, she was "a match for both the loremasters and the athletes of the Eldar in the days of their youth".

Indeed, "she was then of Amazon disposition and bound up her hair as a crown when taking part in athletic feats". This custom was the origin of her Sindarin name Galadriel, which was given to, and accepted by, her much later in Beleriand. The gleaming of her hair was not a mere poetic reference: her hair was held to be an unmatched marvel. It mingled and surpassed the gold hair of her father and the starlike silver of her mother, so the Eldar said that both lights of the Two Trees of Valinor were captured in her tresses. It was also said that this first gave the idea to her uncle Fëanor of capturing the merged light of the Trees, which would result in the making of the Silmarils. He once asked her three times for one of her tresses, but she always refused. Fëanor and Galadriel were always unfriends, both being the greatest Eldar in Valinor; and if Fëanor was greater than she, she was wiser, and her wisdom grew with the long years. For she also had an outstanding gift to see into the minds of others, and, though she judged most with kindness, she hated and feared the darkness in Fëanor, not perceiving that the shadow of the same evil had fallen upon the minds of all the Ñoldor, including her own.

There was still bliss in Valinor when she was born, but soon she was influenced by the unrest of the Ñoldor and afterwards lost her inner peace. She was proud, like most of the House of Finwë, and like her closest brother Finrod, "she had dreams of far lands and dominions that might be her own to order as she would without tutelage". But deep in herself, she had the noble spirit of the Vanyar, which did not allow her to forget the reverence for the Valar.

During the rebellion of Fëanor and the beginning of the Long Night, Galadriel was the only woman of the Ñoldor who stood among the rising princes. Though she swore no oath, the words of Fëanor concerning Middle-earth still kindled a desire in her heart, as she was eager to see those wide unguarded lands and rule a realm of her own. Like the rest of the House of Finarfin, she was also supportive of the Exile by the desire to aid their Sindarin relatives in Middle-earth.

Even though she was one of the leaders in this revolt, during the troubles that followed she fought fiercely against Fëanor by defending her mother's kin during the Kinslaying at Alqualondë and the rape of the ships. Afterwards, she even desired to follow Fëanor to disturb him in all the ways that she could, but nothing could have moved her to return since she had begun her way to exile, as her pride was strong then as it was thereafter. She kept moving forward even under the Doom of Mandos, when her father Finarfin abandoned the march and returned to Valinor, and even when Fëanor left behind the hosts of Fingolfin and the children of Finarfin. Then she, along with Finrod and Fingolfin and his sons, led her people far into the bitter North and crossed the terrors of the Helcaraxë. After many losses, they arrived on the northern shores of the Outer Lands.

Arrival to Middle-earth
Once in Beleriand, those of the House of Finarfin were eager to enter Menegroth in Doriath, but King Elu Thingol received the Ñoldor coldly, and only allowed entrance to those invited by him after some inquiries. Finally in the year 52 of the First Age, Finrod and Galadriel became long guests in Doriath, but her brother eventually departed to the caverns of Narog to establish the stronghold of Nargothrond. Galadriel did not go with him, and remained in Doriath with Celeborn, a kinsman of Thingol, as there was great love between them. Despite their love, they did not marry each other, following the custom among the Eldar of avoiding marriage and child-bearing during the war, but they were eventually betrothed till the war ended. Meanwhile, she dwelt with Queen Melian, from whom she learned much of the wisdom of Middle-earth.

The Western Corn necessary to make lembas had been lost in Beleriand until the Ñoldor brought new grain back, and it flourished by the grace of the Valar. Galadriel was one of the main inheritors of it and of the art of the making of lembas. It is safe to assume Melian benefited from this.

Years passed in Doriath, and Galadriel became dear to Melian, and they spoke often to one another about Valinor. Melian was eager to learn the causes of the Exile of the Ñoldor, but Galadriel would tell her nothing of what occurred after the death of the Trees. In the year 66, Melian asked her directly about this, and Galadriel revealed the story of the Silmarils and how the Ñoldor fled from Aman against the will of the Valar, though she still left out the Oath of Fëanor, the Kinslaying, and the burning of the Telerian ships at Losgar. Melian was able to discern a darkness that was left unsaid, but Galadriel refused to tell her more. Thus, Thingol became concerned regarding the Ñoldor, and he was informed soon afterwards of the Ñoldor's dark deeds in Aman, and it chanced that the children of Finarfin were visiting Galadriel in Doriath. Egged on by his accusing words, Angrod told him everything, and Galadriel's brothers departed heavy-hearted.

Despite all this, Galadriel stayed in Doriath until the year 102, when the kingdom of Nargothrond was finished and a feast was held for all the children of Finarfin. She dwelt there for a while. During this time, she asked Finrod why he remained unmarried. Her brother answered with dark foresight about his kingdom. Back in Doriath, in the year 420, Galadriel heard another foretelling, as Melian told her about a Man who shall cross into Doriath moved by a doom greater than the Girdle of Melian.

Galadriel did not have any significant role in the general course of events in the War of the Great Jewels, but she might have been well informed of the deaths of her brothers Angrod and Aegnor during the Dagor Bragollach; and of Finrod's, while he was held in captivity by Sauron in the year 465. At some point before the Fall of Nargothrond in the year 495, she and Celeborn passed over the mountain to Eriador, far from the turmoil of the last years of the First Age.

After the War of Wrath at the end of the First Age, Eönwë, herald of Manwë, summoned the Elves of Beleriand to the West, so they were received in Tol Eressëa and under the pardon of the Valar. However, some did not wish to leave Middle-earth, such as Celeborn. Being one of the chief leaders of the Ñoldorin rebellion, Galadriel was not allowed to return and a ban was set upon her, to which she replied that she had no wish to do so. The same pride that led her out of Aman still moved her, and she rejected the pardon of the Valar, for as she had once lived in Aman itself, Eressëa seemed only a "second best". She was also moved by love for Celeborn, to whom she probably married around this time.

Second Age
At the beginning of the Second Age, Celeborn and Galadriel dwelt for a time in Lindon, south of the Lune, while Gil-galad ruled in the north Both left Lindon before the years 10-20, when Gil-galad became king in that land, apparently thanks to her influence. They entered Eriador and dwelt for a while around Lake Nenuial, being followed by many Ñoldor, Sindar, and Laegil. They were considered to be the Lord and Lady of the Eldar in Eriador. Probably around the year 300, Galadriel and Celeborn had a daughter: Celebrían.

Around the year 500, Sauron began to stir in Middle-earth again but his name was not known. He was, however, perceived by Galadriel, who noticed there was a controlling evil, and that it was spreading above the world, coming from the East beyond the Misty Mountains. She also thought that this "residue of evil" could only be fought with an alliance of all its enemies. Therefore, she and Celeborn moved eastwards and established in the realm of Eregion near Khazad-dûm. Celeborn was not fond of Dwarves, but Galadriel saw the importance of getting close to them, for she saw military interests even with them. Also, she was a Ñoldo, and therefore close to them in mind and in the passion for crafts; and in Valinor she had learned from Yavanna and Aulë, the creator of the Dwarves himself.

Some Ñoldor were also interested in establishing a realm near Khazad-dûm because they knew mithril had been discovered there. Therefore, many Elven-smiths came to Eregion and created good relations with the Dwarves. Celebrimbor, a descendant of Fëanor, was the greatest of these craft-men and thus became the Lord of Eregion In 750, he was the main builder in the early construction of Ost-in-Edhil. The power of Galadriel and Celeborn also grew: thanks to the Dwarves of Khazad-dûm, they had contact with the Nandorin realm of Lórinand on the other side of the Misty Mountains. Thanks to Galadriel's influence upon Lórinand, Sauron's machinations in the Vales of Anduin were fruitless. Galadriel also got in contact with Númenor, having a meeting with King Aldarion when he came to the Bridge of Tharbad between the years 883-884.

Around the year 1200, Sauron came in disguise to Eriador, but he was only welcomed in Eregion by Celebrimbor and the Elven-smiths, who were interested in his advice on craftsmanship. Galadriel was not deceived, and rejected him, saying that he was not in the training of Aulë as he claimed. While Sauron realized this immediately, he desired "to placate her…with outward patience and courtesy" for some time. All the while, without Galadriel's knowledge, Sauron influenced Celebrimbor and the Gwaith-i-Mírdain against Galadriel and Celeborn. Some time between the years 1350 and 1400, he moved them to expel Galadriel from Eregion in a coup. Thus, Galadriel and Celebrían left through Khazad-dûm to Lórinand, although Celeborn would not enter the Dwarvish realm and remained in Eregion.

When Sauron made the One Ring in the year 1600, his treachery was discovered by Celebrimbor The elven-smith came to Lórinand, seeking counsel from Galadriel. They did not find the strength to destroy the Rings of Power, but she advised him to hide the Three Rings of the Elves where Sauron could not find them. Therefore he gave her Nenya, the White Ring, while the other Rings were given to other Elven lords. This was done in the year 1693, the same year Sauron began the war against the Elves

With the invasion of Eriador, Eregion was destroyed and Celebrimbor was killed. Despite using torture, Sauron could not learn from him where the Elven Rings were, although he suspected that they were kept by Galadriel and Gil-galad. Thanks to the military intervention of Númenor, however, Sauron was defeated in the year 1700 Soon afterwards, Galadriel was affected by the Unquiet of Ulmo and she decided to leave Lórinand to dwell beside the sea. As one of the High-elves, her yearning for the sea was unavoidable, and now she became burdened with the desire to cross to the Blessed Realm, but the ban upon her impeded it. Thus she did not go to the sea yet, but crossed west of the mountains through Khazad-dûm with Celebrían. Seeking Celeborn, they travelled to Imladris, a refuge created by Elrond during the war. Once there, a Council was held, in which it was decided that Imladris would be the Elvish stronghold in the East, rather than the desolate Eregion.

Galadriel, Celeborn, and Celebrían dwelt for a long time in Imladris, but at some point they left and moved to Belfalas near the sea at the place later known as Dol Amroth. There were a few inhabitants there, but they were visited by Nandorin parties. Apparently, they returned to Lórien twice before the Last Alliance and the end of the Second Age, but their whereabouts during the final millennia of that Age is untold.

Third Age
Rule in Lórien
In the year 109 of the early Third Age, Galadriel and Celeborn's daughter Celebrían wedded Elrond the Half-elven The did not stay at first with her, however, for Galadriel was filled with foreboding, and was concerned about the growing shadow in Mirkwood and Dol Guldur. Therefore she and Celeborn made long journeys investigating Rhovanion, going from Gondor and the borders of Mordor to Thranduil in Northern Mirkwood. They also stayed a long time in Lórien with king Amroth, for Galadriel saw with her wisdom that this prosperous realm could be a stronghold against the growing Shadow, if it had better rule. At this point, the Order of Wizards arrived in Middle-earth, and only Galadriel, Elrond, and Círdan knew where they came from Around the year 1100, the Wise, including Galadriel as one the chief Eldar, were well aware of the evil dwelling in Dol Guldur, but thought it was one of the Nazgûl

After their enquiries, Galadriel and Celeborn passed over the mountains to Imladris, and there dwelt for many years with their kin.

Between the years 1980 and 1981, a terror appeared in Khazad-dûm and the Dwarves abandoned the realm, while the many Silvan Elves from Lórien had to flee south To make things worse, Amroth was lost, leaving no heir, and the Elven realm was left without a ruler. Therefore Celeborn and Galadriel went there, welcomed by the people, and took up the rule jointly, but refused to take the royal title and were called the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim instead. Saving the realm from the perils of the moment, they dwelt and ruled permanently there.

As the shadow of Dol Guldur grew again, the White Council was formed in the year 2463 It was summoned by Galadriel who, being a good friend of Gandalf, recommended that he be made head of the Council. But this distinction fell instead to Saruman

In the year 2510, her daughter Celebrían departed to the West after being wounded by Orcs That same year, she aided Eorl and his riders in the Battle of the Field of Celebrant by creating a white mist that drove out the shadows from Dol Guldur, unintentionally causing their descendants to regard her and the Golden Wood with fear.

The White Council would not take action until Gandalf discovered that the shadow growing in Dol Guldur was Sauron. After deliberating, the Council joined forces and drove Sauron out of Dol Guldur in the year 2941

Some years later, Aragorn II entered Lothlórien after many travels, and was admitted by Galadriel. She bade him to change his worn-out clothes and dressed him like a proper prince. During that time, Aragorn became betrothed to her granddaughter Arwen.

War of the Ring

Galadriel and Celeborn were well informed about the Company of the Ring, its members, and their mission, before its coming to Lothlórien, perhaps informed by messages from Rivendell. In the evening of January 17 in the year 3019, the Company arrived at Caras Galadhon. Coming to the talan of the Lady and Lord, each member was greeted by name by Celeborn. Noticing that Gandalf was missing, Galadriel asked where he was, for she wished to speak with him. Hearing that they had encountered Durin's Bane and that this was in fact a Balrog from ancient times, Celeborn criticized the passing of the Company through Moria. However, Galadriel was more sympathetic, especially towards Gimli, who bowed to her in respect. Before inviting the members of the Company to rest and heal there, she looked deep into their eyes and they all felt their hearts exposed

A month later, on February 15, Frodo Baggins the bearer of the One Ring, was walking in the evening with Samwise Gamgee when they encountered Galadriel. She led them to an enclosed garden and showed them a silver basin. Filling it with water, a mirror was formed, which allowed them to see things that were and that might come. Frodo saw the Eye of Sauron, and she explained that she knew Frodo's mind well, for Sauron also tried to look into hers. She also kept a Ring of Power. Showing him Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, she explained that its power would disappear once Frodo destroyed the One, and Lórien would fade. When Frodo offered the One Ring to her, she laughed in response, saying that she "greatly desired" it. However, she then began to ponder how powerful she would become with the Ring's power, and as a result, a great light from Nenya covered her overwhelming height. After the light faded and she laughed again, she told Frodo that she had passed "the test" and that she would "diminish…into the West" Indeed, with this rejection of temptation and her long opposition against Sauron, the ban upon her return to Aman was finally lifted.

That night, the Lord and Lady summoned the Company and spoke of their departure, which was appointed for the following morning. The next day, she sent the Fellowship off on their Quest, furnished with gifts for all the members, including lembas and Elven-cloaks. Later, a farewell party was held, which the Lord and Lady attended in a swan boat; from it, Galadriel sang a song about Eldamar. After everyone ate and drank, she proceed to give specific gifts to each member.

Among the gifts was the Elfstone, which she gave to Aragorn from Arwen "as a token of hope". The jewel was also in part a bridal gift and a token of the future wedding of Arwen and Aragorn, done following the Noldorin custom in which the bride's mother should give to the bridegroom a jewel. Since Arwen's mother Celebrían had departed long ago, Galadriel did it in her place. When Galadriel stated that she was unsure as to what to give to Gimli, she asked what he wanted. After complimenting her beauty due to being touched by her nobility and beauty, he asked for a single strand of her hair. Instead, she generously gifted him three strands, which he promised to put into an imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of his house in memory of her. Apart from the strands of hair given to Gimli and the Elfstone to Aragorn, she gave a Mallorn seed and a small box of earth from her garden to Samwise Gamgee and a belt each to Boromir, Meriadoc Brandybuck, and Peregrin Took. To Legolas she gave a long, stout bow of the Galadhrim. And last, to Frodo, she gave a a small crystal phial specially prepared by her, which contained the light of Gil-Orestel. As the Fellowship departed, the Company saw her one last time while sailing down to the Anduin: a shining figure, all clad in white, raising her arms, and Frodo was able to hear her clearly reciting a long poem in Elvish despite the distance.

The following day, a resurrected Gandalf was brought the peak of Celebdil to Lórien by Gwaihir, who was sent by Galadriel. He was received in Caras Galadhon, and was healed and clothed in white. He also took and gave counsel. Before he left, Galadriel gave him some prophetic messages for Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli.

The land of Lórien was not exempt from the battles of the War of the Ring: between March 11 and March 18, the Galadhrim suffered three assaults from Dol Guldur. After the Downfall of Barad-dûr, Celeborn crossed the Anduin with a host and began the destruction of Dol Guldur. Soon afterward, Galadriel threw down the walls of the fortress and opened its pits.

Later history

Galadriel, Celeborn, and their company attended the wedding of Aragorn and Arwen in Minas Tirith. Soon afterward they joined the crowded funeral riding of King Théoden to Rohan. After the funerals in the Golden Hall, they continued their travel northwards with other companions and halted in Isengard. Treebeard revealed that he had freed Saruman, and regretted that he would not see Galadriel and Celeborn again. Celeborn replied that he was unsure, but Galadriel affirmed that it would be her last meeting with him, giving Treebeard some cryptic words concerning Arda Envinyanta. They continued on their way and encountered Saruman, who, released by Treebeard, snapped that she had always hated him, and that he would find comfort now knowing that her realm was destroyed as well as his.

Two years later, on September 22 of the year 3021, Frodo and Sam encountered a Wandering Company while traveling around The Shire, and found that Elrond, Galadriel, and Bilbo Baggins were a part of it. Nenya was visible on Galadriel's finger, and she seemed to shine like the moon. Frodo decided to depart with them and the hobbits joined the company led by Elrond and Galadriel. On September 29, they reached Mithlond and departed over the sea at the very end of the Third Age.

Sometime later during the Fourth Age, she received Celeborn, her husband. In the year 120, it is said that Gimli sailed to the West alongside Legolas out of his desire to see Galadriel again. He may have been allowed thanks to her intervention.

Etymology
Galadriel is a Sindarin name translated by J.R.R. Tolkien as "maiden crowned with a garland of bright radiance", "Maiden crowned with gleaming hair", "glittering garland", and "maiden crowned with a radiant garland". Galadriel consists of galad ("light, radiance") and rî ("crown"). It was an epessë given to her in her youth because, while doing exercise, she usually bound up her long golden hair as a crown.

Tolkien notes that the element galad had no relation to Sindarin galadh or Silvan Elvish galað ("tree"). Due to this coincidence the name Galadriel was occasionally rendered as Galadhriel, as Tolkien explained:

When Celeborn and Galadriel became the rulers of the Galadh, the name of Galadriel became associated with trees, an association that was aided by the name of her husband, which also appeared to contain a tree-word; so that outside Lórien among those whose memories of the ancient days and Galadriel's history had grown dim her name was often altered to 'Galadhriel', though never in Lórien itself.

Other names
At the time of her birth, Finarfin named his only daughter Artanis. Her father-name meant "noble woman" in Quenya, from arta and nís.

Due to Artanis's height and her great strength of body and will, Eärwen chose the Quenya name Nerwen, meaning "man-maiden".

Alatáriel was the Telerin name given to Galadriel by Celeborn, meaning "Maiden Crowned with Radiant Garland", which referred to her hair. The Quenya form of this name was Altáriel, although the proper form would have been Ñaltariel. Its Sindarin cognate Galadriel was chosen by her to be her Sindarin name, because it was the most beautiful of her names and had been given to her as an epessë by her lover, Teleporno of the Teleri, whom she wedded later in Beleriand.

Faramir of Gondor referred to her as a Mistress of Magic when Frodo and Sam were with him in Henneth Annûn

House of Finarfin
The Heraldic Device of the House of FinarfinThe Heraldic Device of King Finrod of NargothrondThe Heraldic Device of High King Gil-galad

Finwë	
	 
Indis
 
Fingolfin	
 	 
 	 
Finarfin	
 	 
 	 
Eärwen
 
 	 
Finrod	
 	 
 	 
Angrod	
 	 
 	 
Eðellos	
 	 
 	 
Aegnor	
 	 
 	 
Galadriel	
 	 
 	 
Celeborn
	 
Orodreth	
	 
Celebrían
	 
Finduilas	
	 
Gil-galad


In other versions
"There is no part of the history of Middle-earth more full of problems than the story of Galadriel and Celeborn..."
—Christopher Tolkien in "The History of Galadriel and Celeborn and of Amroth King of Lórien"
The History of The Lord of the Rings
The first appearance of Galadriel in the legendarium was during the composition of The Lord of the Rings. The first reference J.R.R. Tolkien ever made to her was in some barely decipherable notes for the "Lothlórien" chapter, which mentioned that a "?L of Galadrim ?and Lady and ...... ?w to White Council." The notes following this are a stub of them receiving the Company of the Ring. Both the Lord and Lady are described as being "clad in white" and having "white hair". In other isolated notes about this chapter, Tolkien wondered "if Galadriel is alone and is wife of Elrond".

The first mention of "Keleborn and Galadriel" by name was in the narrative of the following chapter, although Tolkien considered other Elvish names before writing Galadriel in ink. There Galadriel describes Keleborn and herself as "wise beyond the measure of the Elves of Middle-earth", and says that they "have dwelt there since the Mountains were reared and the Sun was young", from which Christopher Tolkien deduced they were both conceived as Gódhellim, exiled Ñoldor. After the episode with the Company, both names are changed, so she became Galadrien ("tree-lady") in the next pages. Other notable details that were altered later include the white colour of her hair, that she was the keeper of the Ring of Earth, and that after the departure of the Company, Frodo was supposed to never see Galadriel ever again.

In a list of matters "to be explained before the end", Tolkien wondered about what happened with Galadriel after the War of the Ring:

They learn  that Nazgûl razed Lórien and Keleborn fled with a remnant to Mirkwood. Galadriel was lost or was hidden. Or shall Lórien be left slowly to fade? Yes. Galadriel parts with Keleborn who elects to stay in the world and ?wo. She is seen by Frodo in old age, when he and Sam see Galadriel and Bilbo...

To summarize, earlier and rejected names during the composition of The Lord of the Rings were Finduilas, Rhien, Galdrin, Galdrien, Galadhrien, and Galadrien.

Expanding the First Age
In Appendix F of The Lord of the Rings, Tolkien had already stated that Galadriel was "of the royal house of Finrod, father of Felagund, Lord of Nargothrond" (in the Second Edition, Tolkien changed the names to Finarfin and Finrod Felagund, respectively). Although not using much detail, Tolkien was thus introducing Galadriel into the Silmarillion tradition, and having finished The Lord of the Rings, he began the work of expanding the backstory of the character. Galadriel enters this tradition in "The Annals of Aman", in which she is first mentioned when Tolkien decided the children of Finrod (later Finarfin) would be related to Thingol through Eärwen. In the Annals, written after the publication of The Lord of the Rings, Galadriel stands out by being valiant and the only woman leading the Exile of the Ñoldor, but there is no explanation of the nature of her rebellion or its later impact on her life.

Indeed, Christopher Tolkien explains that when the chapter "Farewell to Lórien" was written, his father had not conceived the idea of a ban upon Galadriel's return due to her role in the Flight of the Noldor. In a letter from 1953, even before The Lord of the Rings was published, Tolkien did not object to the comparison of Galadriel with the Virgin Mary, a comparison he would object to later.

Written in the same years, "The Grey Annals" follow "The Annals of Aman", telling the chronology of Beleriand, mainly after the Return of the Ñoldor. Here Galadriel's role is briefly expanded, limited to her relation with Melian and a conversation with her brother Finrod. The darkness pending upon all the Ñoldor is explicitly mentioned, but the same happens with the innocence of the children of Finrod (later Finarfin) during the discussions with Thingol and Melian. Sadly, Tolkien left these Annals unfinished at the point of "The Wanderings of Húrin", so Galadriel's history at the end of the First Age is untold.

Expanding the Second Age
After the publication of The Lord of the Rings, Tolkien most expanded the story of Galadriel in the Second Age in "Concerning Galadriel and Celeborn". This manuscript is the only full narrative dealing with this matter, but sadly it is a stub full of corrections, and Tolkien never solved some contradictions that would be raised later. Christopher Tolkien comments that what is now remarkable is that there is still no presence of the idea of a ban upon Galadriel's return: she stays in Middle-earth out of her love for Celeborn. There could be some pride on her part, as she was eager to visit Middle-earth, but later she stays in Eriador after the first fall of Sauron as a sort of duty until he was finally defeated.

The first clear mention of pride in Galadriel's decision is probably in one of many manuscripts written around 1959 dealing with Elven growing. In this text it is briefly mentioned that Galadriel rejected coming back to the West and live in Tol Eressëa, moved by her love for Celeborn and maybe by her pride, as she had lived in Aman as a princess, so the Lonely Isle would be a "second best". It can be seen here that she was allowed to return to the West, but limited to Eressëa, far from the blessed lands. There is a sort of ban, not particularly against her, but her pride stands out, as it will become in an essential aspect of her character in the following "phase" of her development.

Rebel exile
In mid-1967, Tolkien wrote long drafts of a letter in which he first mentioned the idea of Galadriel not being allowed to return after the First Age as a punishment for being one of the leaders of the Ñoldor rebellion. In a footnote, he interprets the Namárië as Galadriel's wish that Frodo might go West, as she cannot, believing she is to remain in Middle-earth forever. More radically, Tolkien interprets the test of the Ring as granting Galadriel permission to return to Aman. Christopher Tolkien does not believe that this letter is proof that the ban was present when such passages were written. Given all this, It can be affirmed that what is said in this letter are reinterpretations made a posteriori.

Just two months later, The Road Goes Ever On: A Song Cycle was published in the United States of America, in which Tolkien included a brief biography of Galadriel in notes to the Namárië. Not only the Elvish poem, but the line "What ship will carry me again across such a wide sea?" of the poem mentioned above, are interpreted here as expressions of Galadriel's longing, unable to return to the West. Her arrogance is connected to her rebellious role, since she replied proudly to the prohibition by saying that she had no desire to return.

It is strange that Tolkien's new vision was so clear at this time, since there does not seem to be any intermediate text in which he considered this version or others. He would immediately go ahead with this vision, so it would also affect the character's background in the First Age.

Written in 1968 or later, "The Shibboleth of Fëanor" includes a long passage about Galadriel during her life in Aman and during the Exile. It is the first place that highlights her enmity with Fëanor before the Exile, and also her independence from him, since her desire to see and rule distant lands was already present in her character before the Speech of Fëanor upon Túna. Galadriel's role during the Flight of the Ñoldor is described as courageous and blameless: she had a legitimate desire to help her Teleri kin in Middle-earth, and she fought fiercely against Fëanor in the Kinslaying at Alqualondë. However, she is guilty of pride, not only in her departure, as here she is granted forgiveness after Morgoth's defeat, but she rejects it.

A few years later, in 1971, this conception of Galadriel still remained. In response to a letter, Tolkien acknowledges the influence of the figure of the Virgin Mary on the character of Galadriel, but now points out a radical difference: Galadriel was a penitent with a past marked by pride and rebellion against divine authorities.

Unstained exile
In a letter written in August of 1973 one month before his death, Tolkien gave a completely different description of Galadriel:

Galadriel was 'unstained': she had committed no evil deeds. She was an enemy of Fëanor. She did not reach Middle-earth with the other Noldor, but independently. Her reasons for desiring to go to Middle-earth were legitimate, and she would have been permitted to depart, but for the misfortune that before she set out the revolt of Fëanor broke out, and she became involved in the desperate measures of Manwë, and the ban on all emigrations.

This was not an isolated idea; around the same time he wrote an outline of the revised backstory of Galadriel, which he could not carry into narrative, as it ended up being probably his last writing related to the legendarium. Here Galadriel is described as totally opposed to Fëanor from the beginning, and she felt confined in Aman and desired to depart to Middle-earth in order to exercise her talents: "for being brilliant in mind and swift in action she had early absorbed all of what she was capable of the teaching which the Valar thought fit to give the Eldar". Manwë was probably aware of her desire and he had not forbidden her to depart, nor given permission yet. Nonetheless, Galadriel did not remain inactive and thought in the ships of the Teleri, so she dwelt in Alqualondë with her mother's kin. There she met Celeborn (here a Telerin prince and her cousin), and both planned to build a boat and seek the permission of the Valar to depart to Middle-earth.

But then Melkor and Ungoliant destroyed the Two Trees, and Fëanor began his rebellion, in which Galadriel had no part, heroically defending Alqualondë alongside Celeborn against the Ñoldor and saving Celeborn's ship from them. Now Galadriel sailed in despair without asking Manwë, and indeed she would have been told to stay in Valinor in that hour, despite her desire being legitimate; and thus the ban against departure fell upon her and she was forbidden to return. She and Celeborn reached Middle-earth before Fëanor, finding Círdan's haven and being received with joy. They did not join the war against Morgoth, which they considered hopeless without the help of the Valar, and instead they recommended going eastwards and befriending the Dark Elves and Men living there. But the Elves of Beleriand did not heed these counsels, so both of them crossed the Ered Lindon before the end of the First Age. They were granted permission to return by the Valar, but they rejected it.

Christopher Tolkien explains that this change probably had its roots in the philosophical implications of Galadriel's power in Middle-earth. He is certain that his father had the intention of changing all the narrative of The Silmarillion related to the backstory of Galadriel, despite what was already written. After all, she was not part of the story of the Ñoldor in the first place and the book had not been published. The only notable problem was in the backstory of Celeborn, which contradicted what was already published in J.R.R. Tolkien's life.

Unsolved contradictions
As can be seen, the development of Galadriel throughout Tolkien's texts is mainly structured around the nature of her exile and ban from Aman. There are some loose contradictions that can be easily explained as mere mistakes. A noticeable case is Galadriel using Nenya during the Second Age in "Concerning Galadriel and Celeborn", which contradicts everything known about the Rings of Power in The Lord of the Rings. On the contrary, the following contradictions result from the several revisions and it is untold how Tolkien would have solved them.

Galadriel in Nargothrond
In "The Grey Annals", it is written that Galadriel went from Doriath to Nargothrond "and dwelt there for a while" after Finrod had completed its building. But while expanding the Quenta Silmarillion, Tolkien wrote: "Yet Galadriel his sister went never to Nargothrond, for she remained long in Doriath", and revised it with "Yet Galaðriel his sister dwelt never in Nargothrond". It is unclear which version was written as definitive, but Christopher Tolkien chose the former one for the fifteenth chapter of his edition of The Silmarillion.

Passing over the mountains
Christopher Tolkien explains that in the first conception, Galadriel went to the east from Beleriand alone and found Celeborn, probably of Nandorin origin, in Lórien. Hence in "The Mirror of Galadriel" chapter she said Celeborn dwelt in the West before the Dawn, and that she crossed the mountains from Beleriand apparently alone. This contradicts the information in Appendix B of The Lord of the Rings and in The Road Goes Ever On: A Song Cycle, in which Celeborn is a Sinda who accompanied Galadriel from Lindon.

The time when she passed over the mountains is also contradictory, as Galadriel said that it was "ere the fall of Nargothrond and Gondolin" yet in Appendix B, it is stated that at the beginning of the Second Age she was still dwelling in Lindon before passing over the mountains. This contradiction in the same work must have been due to a mistake during revision. It is possible, however, that Galadriel first left Beleriand to avoid the cataclysmic war, later came to Lindon to join the surviving exiles, and crossed the Ered Luin again looking for a settlement.

Marriage of Galadriel and Celeborn
In Appendix B, while describing the beginning of the Second Age, it is said that Celeborn dwelt in Harlindon with his wife Galadriel, so it appears that they were married at this point In a manuscript from around 1959, Tolkien said that Galadriel and Celeborn probably married "soon after the overthrow of Morgoth" before they crossed the Mountains. Another manuscript from the same period states the same, but in its following notes Tolkien wrote that Galadriel did not marry Celeborn until they were settled (in Lake Nenuial, as understood by the context). In a manuscript from 1965, while Tolkien pondered about Amroth being their child, he wrote that Galadriel and Celeborn were betrothed, but did not marry until the confusion of the War of Wrath had ended and the Second Age had begun.

Birth-year of Celebrían
The year and the place of Celebrían's birth was never definite. Tolkien considered as early as year 9 of the Second Age, and as late as 350 (850 was also considered, but as a mere conjecture). For details and references see In other versions section of the Celebrían article.

Mother of Amroth
In "Concerning Galadriel and Celeborn", both Celebrían and Amroth are children of Galadriel and Celeborn, but in later texts dating from 1969, Tolkien made Amroth the son of Amdír. For more details see In other versions section of the Amroth article.

1977 The Silmarillion
Christopher Tolkien was aware of his father's latest concept in which Galadriel left Aman free of any guilt. However, as this was a mere projected idea, he had to make use of the completed narratives for his edition of The Silmarillion in which she was a rebel leader. It is notable that in this work there is no explanation of Galadriel's reasons for remaining in Middle-earth after the War of Wrath, save that Celeborn was unwilling to leave, nor is there any mention of a ban against her return or her concerns about the remaining evil. This way, Christopher did not choose any particular position and let the reader decide, but also stripped the character of all development in relation to The Lord of the Rings.

Douglas Charles Kane noted that Christopher Tolkien, for his edition, removed some statements on Galadriel from his father's work. The original text of the fifth chapter said that Galadriel was "the most valiant" lady of the House of Finwë. The original text of the ninth chapter mentioned her as "Galadriel the valiant and fair". According to Kane, Galadriel is not the only female character inexplicably diminished by Christopher's editorial choices.

In adaptations
Bakshi's The Lord of the Rings

In Ralph Bakshi's 1978 Lord of the Rings, Galadriel is voiced by Scottish actress Annette Crosbie with Jeri Lea Ray doing the modeling.

The Lord of the Rings film trilogy
"Even the smallest person can change the course of the future."
—Galadriel to Frodo Baggins
Galadriel is portrayed by Cate Blanchett in Peter Jackson's film trilogy (2001 - 2003). She appears in all three films as a supporting character.

Galadriel narrates the opening prologue to The Fellowship of the Ring, describing the War of the Ring and the initial defeat of Sauron. She is shown receiving one of the Elven Rings of Power. Galadriel appears in person later when the Fellowship arrive in Lórien, greeting them alongside her husband Celeborn. She speaks telepathically with Frodo and leads him to her mirror, in which he sees a vision of Sauron's victory. Galadriel warns Frodo that Boromir will try and take the One Ring, upon which Frodo offers the One Ring to her. In that moment, Galadriel herself is tempted by the Ring, but she is able to overcome the temptation and "pass the test." She gives Frodo a phial of light when the Fellowship departs Lothlórien.

In the extended edition, Galadriel and Celeborn give the other members of the Fellowship various gifts as well. Besides Frodo and Sam, she gives Merry and Pippin an Elven dagger, Aragorn a curved Elvish hunting knife, Legolas a Bow of the Galadhrim and three strands of her hair to Gimli.

In The Two Towers, Galadriel appears in a single scene, warning Elrond telepathically that the One Ring is tempting Faramir. She then urges him to send aid to the people of Rohan at Helm's Deep. Strangely, the Elves that do arrive at Helm's Deep under Haldir are from Lothlórien, not Rivendell. Although there is mention of osanwe ("thought speech") in Tolkien's writings, Galadriel's scenes from The Two Towers have no direct counterparts in the novels.

In The Return of the King, Galadriel appears in a vision to Frodo near Cirith Ungol, urging him to continue his quest. She also appears at the very end of the film alongside Elrond and Celeborn at the Grey Havens. She departs with them, Gandalf, Frodo, and Bilbo to Valinor.

The Hobbit film trilogy

Galadriel's role in Jackson's The Hobbit film trilogy is entirely invented for the adaptation beyond the reference to the White Council fighting Sauron, as she does not appear in the original novel. However, some of these scenes may have been based on material from Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle-earth which accounts for what she was doing during the time when the events of The Hobbit took place. She appears in all three films as a supporting character.

Galadriel first appears in An Unexpected Journey at a meeting of the White Council alongside Elrond, Gandalf, and Saruman. She believes Gandalf when he claims that the Necromancer is becoming a bigger threat and that something must be done with Dol Guldur.

In The Desolation of Smaug, Galadriel telepathically encourages Gandalf to investigate the tombs of the Nine in the High Fells of Rhudaur and to confront the Necromancer.

In The Battle of the Five Armies, Galadriel rescues Gandalf from Dol Guldur. Initially, it seems that she has come alone; she disintegrates an Orc with a blast of magic from her hand. However, she is quickly cornered by the spectral forms of the Nazgûl as the disembodied voice of Sauron begins taunting her in Black Speech. The Dark Lord mocks her for being alone in the shadow, a singular light in the dark.

However, Galadriel reveals that Saruman and Elrond have accompanied her to Dol Guldur, and the two battle the Ringwraiths while Galadriel attempts to heal Gandalf with a kiss, an action which drains her energy. Radagast arrives to take Gandalf away, and Galadriel resists Gandalf's plea to have her join him. After the Ringwraiths are defeated, Sauron himself manifests and restores the Nazgûl as he bears down on the White Council, threatening them with the fall of the West and the rise of Angmar. While Saruman and Elrond recoil in horror in the presence of the Dark Lord, an enraged Galadriel rises in her darker ethereal form to challenge Sauron.

She easily overpowers the Nazgûl with a light spell and casts them away as her and Sauron engage in a duel of wills with the latter trying to assert his power and waste her away. Galadriel, however, proves herself unyielding and declares Sauron as "Nameless, Faceless, and Formless" and demands that he returns to the Void from whence he came. Ultimately Galadriel overpowers Sauron, who's Necromancer disguise is obliterated, and flees into the East as an orb of fire. The encounter saps Galadriel's energy and she falls over, however, and Saruman instructs her to retreat to Lórien while he promises to handle the threat of Sauron himself.

The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power
Galadriel
Actor
Morfydd Clark (adult),
Amelie Child Villiers (child)
Aliases
Scourge of the Orcs
Titles
Commander of the Northern Armies
Warrior of the Wastelands
Occupations
Warrior
Relationships
Celeborn (spouse)
Race
Elves
Culture
High Elf (Golden House of Finarfin)
Age
Over 3000 years
Hair
Blonde
Eyes
Blue
First seen
"A Shadow of the Past"


"Galadriel - A legendary elven warrior and the Commander of the Northern Armies. Far from the wise, ethereal Lady of Lórien she will one day become, this much younger Galadriel is headstrong and relentless – and obsessed with hunting an elusive evil."
—Official description on Amazon.com
An alternate version of Galadriel is the most central character in the Amazon Studios series The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power, portrayed by Amelie Child Villiers (as a young Galadriel) and Morfydd Clark (as an adult). This version of Galadriel expands-on and deviates considerably from her character as described by J.R.R. Tolkien in The Lord of the Rings and the Silmarillion.

Early life & first attempts to hunt Sauron

She is first seen as a child while dwelling in Valinor, making a paper ship, as her brother Finrod taught her; Finrod gives her counsel, after stopping her from striking another child in retaliation for destroying the ship.

Many years pass and, following the catastrophe in which Morgoth destroyed the Two Trees, Finrod joins his kindred in sailing to Middle-earth and waging war against Morgoth. This section of the episode is narrated by Galadriel. Her version of events omits several important details about the Elves and why they left Valinor (including the Revolt of the Noldor and the First Kinslaying).

Though the Dark Lord is eventually defeated, his chief servant (Sauron) escapes, and Finrod takes the lead in finding him. Sauron kills Finrod, however; Galadriel pledges to continue his mission. In the Legendarium, we are told Finrod died saving the human warrior Beren (on a quest to retrieve a Silmaril), and that this happened several decades before the defeat of Morgoth. Yet the series and Galadriel's narration both give different, canon variant versions of this.

By the middle of the Second Age, Galadriel had led an expedition into Forodwaith to search for evidence of Sauron's whereabouts; despite her companions' hesitancy, and the harsh environment, an abandoned fortress of Morgoth is found. Here, Galadriel and Thondir discover evidence of dark magic and an anvil bearing Sauron's sigil, still-hot, centuries later. Her company is attacked by a snow-troll, which Galadriel quickly slays. Upon announcing her intent to continue the expedition further north, the rest of her company refuses, and she, albeit unwillingly, returns with them to Lindon.

Upon returning to Lindon, she is met by her friend, Elrond, who—although glad to see her—warns her that the High King Gil-galad disapproves of her insistence that Sauron still poses a threat to Elf-kind. Galadriel agrees to hold her tongue, and she is honoured with the rest of her companions by the King, who gives them the gift of returning to Valinor; it is unclear why Galadriel had to earn this journey, as the Elves were allowed to travel freely to Valinor, and did not have to earn it. While Galadriel leaves with the others on a ship to Valinor, she changes her mind at the last moment, diving into the sea. Nonetheless, Galadriel was still banned from returning to Valinor at this point, since she had rejected the pardon of the Valar—so it is unclear why Gil-galad thought that she would be allowed into Aman.

Sundering Seas & Númenor
The following plotline involving Númenor was invented for the series. There is no mention of Galadriel ever visited the island kingdom in any of Tolkien's writings.

After some time, Galadriel is found by several castaways on a makeshift raft (one of whom identifies himself as "Halbrand"), who is actually Sauron, in-disguise. The castaways are terrified of a creature known only as "the worm" that had destroyed their ship, and soon their fears are realized, as the worm returns and kills all the castaways excepting Halbrand, who retains the raft. Halbrand takes a keen interest in Galadriel while remaining silent about his own story. When a fierce storm arises, Galadriel is pulled beneath the water’s surface by a weighted rope; Halbrand rescues her and the two survive, though the stress of the storm leaves them weakened. They then drift, helplessly, until they are found by a Númenórean ship, commanded by Elendil.

Elendil takes Galadriel and Halbrand back to Armenelos, capital city of Númenor, and brings the two before Queen-regent Míriel. Galadriel immediately demands passage back to Middle-earth, inciting the ire of the Númenóreans; Halbrand is able to negotiate a tentative peace, while Míriel decides what to do. Míriel appoints Elendil to keep watch over Galadriel in the meantime, which initially irks the Elf, until Elendil reveals himself to be an Elf-friend, and a speaker of Quenya. Elendil takes Galadriel to the great Hall of Lore, upon her request, and a significant discovery is soon made in the vast archives—an ancient document, bearing the same sigil as was left on Finrod's body. From this document, Galadriel discovers that the sigil is a crude map, signifying the region of the Southlands which Sauron, apparently, intends to conquer, as his own. She also discovers a document bearing the same insignia as borne by Halbrand, indicating him to be the rightful king of the Southlands, though Halbrand says he took it off of a dead man.

The Southlands were also created for the series. Tolkien's work and various notes suggest Mordor already existed and was called by that name because of its volcanic activity by this point in the 2nd 

Returning to Armenelos, Galadriel is granted an audience with Míriel, and requests an army to counter Sauron in the Southlands. Upon being denied, Galadriel angrily demands an audience with Tar-Palantir, the actual ruler and, for this, is thrown into prison, where Halbrand advises her to learn to be more nuanced in her approach. Soon, Pharazôn, Míriel's chief councilor, arrives to inform Galadriel she will be sent back alone to Middle-earth. Galadriel evades the guards and escapes, breaking into the tower where Tar-Palantir dwelt. Míriel had expected this and is waiting for her there, where Galadriel sees the aged king to be near the point of death. Míriel takes Galadriel to a separate room where there is a palantír; she has her look-into the artifact, which shows Galadriel the same vision of Númenor's destruction that Míriel had witnessed herself.

In the legendarium, Míriel was never Regent, as her father ruled until the end of his natural life. He was not deposed, as the series mentions. Pharazôn was, in fact Míriel's cousin, as was Elendil.

Nonetheless, Míriel makes Galadriel to depart alone as planned, though just as she enters her boat, the leaves of Nimloth began to fall, indicating a grave warning. Seeing this, Míriel changes her mind and announces that Númenor will send an army to the Southlands after all. In the days following, Galadriel assists in giving training to the recruit volunteers. Becoming aware that Halbrand desires not to go to Middle-earth but to remain in Númenor, Galadriel attempts to persuade him to accept the mantle of king, only after much argument succeeding. She departs Armenelos on the tenth day since Míriel's decision aboard one of three ships bound for Middle-earth.

The Southlands
Galadriel catches sight of Middle-earth's coast well before the Númenóreans do, and briefly meets Isildur. The following day, having crossed the Ephel Dúath, she, Halbrand, and the Númenórean cavalry ride to Tirharad, halting Adar's aggression, though not before he acquires the artifact he searched for: a Hilt forged by Morgoth. She kills many Orcs at Tirharad, which Arondir and Bronwyn's refugees had fortified, and captures Adar with Halbrand's help, after entreating her horse to run quickly after him. She convinces Halbrand to spare Adar and takes him prisoner, learning of his claim to have killed Sauron. Galadriel nearly cuts Adar's throat, desiring justice, but is stopped by Halbrand, who she later thanks, and is thanked in return for the help Halbrand perceives having received from her.

Shortly after this, she and her allies realize they have been deceived, for Adar had switched the dark hilt with a decoy, and Waldreg had used the Orc Sigil Hilt to activate a mechanism causing Orodruin to erupt, sending forth flame and ash over all the Southlands. Though nearly smothered in ash, she survives the eruption and comes across Theo in the chaos, with whom she travels towards the Númenórean camp, both giving him counsel on how to live well and helping him to evade Orcs along the way. The elf lady also passes her sword to the young man. Upon arriving at the camp, she learns of Míriel's plans to leave and return to Middle-earth, and of Halbrand's status. She finds he has been severely wounded in the abdomen, and concludes he needs Elvish medicine, and so rides with him to Eregion.

Eregion

Galadriel arrives six days later in Ost-in-Edhil, where Halbrand receives medical attention and soon recovers, finding his way to Celebrimbor's forge and quickly gaining his trust by revealing his knowledge of metallurgy. Galadriel, however, becomes suspicious of Halbrand after Celebrimbor voices a number of phrases she first heard from Adar, who had heard them from Sauron. Halbrand continues to act kindly towards her and make advances in helping Celebrimbor in making a design from mithril that would keep the Elves from dying.

In the meantime, Galadriel discovers a document disproving Halbrand's claim as King of the Southlands, and she confronts him about his identity. Here Halbrand reveals himself to her as Sauron. She attempts to shank him but he grapples her arm and through a vision attempts to draw her to his side, arguing that he wishes to heal Middle-earth. Though persuasive, Galadriel ultimately rejects his offer, though she keeps his identity a secret so that Celebrimbor will go through with forging the needed artifacts. She opines to Celebrimbor that three rings are needed instead of Sauron's proposed two, and the Master-smith proceeds to forge the Three Rings: Vilya, Nenya, and Narya.

In radio series
Galadriel was voiced by Marian Diamond in BBC's The Lord of the Rings 1981 radio series.

Galadriel in 
Galadriel in The Lord of the Rings Online

In video games
In Multi-Users in Middle-earth (MUME), Galadriel lives in Lothlórien and there is a mysterious quest involving her mirror.
In The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth, Galadriel appears as one of the "Ring Heroes", and is one of the two most powerful units in the game. She has the appearance of her corrupted image seen briefly in Jackson's films. She wields magic that can swipe dozens of enemy units off of their feet in a single hit. Her power is to summon a tornado, as the one she supposedly used to destroy Dol Guldur.
Introduced in The Mines of Moria expansion, Galadriel plays a prominent role in the Epic storyline in The Lord of the Rings Online. She gives the player guidance by showing them a personalized vision on her Mirror, assists the Dwarves of the Iron Garrison who attempt to reclaim Moria, and authorizes an assault on Dol Guldur to distract the Enemy's eye from the Fellowship leaving Lothlórien. She sends the message to Elrond urging him to assemble the Grey Company and lead them south to Aragorn's aid; when the player returns to Lothlórien in the company of a girl from Dunland, Galadriel sends them and another Lórien Elf to follow the path of the Fellowship along the Great River and discover what had happened on Amon Hen. During the final days of the War of the Ring, Galadriel assembles the Council of Elven Lords, where it is decided to bring their armies against Dol Guldur even though it would hasten the decline of their race in Middle-earth, such as her Mirror's power being spent forevermore. After she brings down the walls of Dol Guldur, Galadriel meets Arwen on her journey south to her wedding and they visit the site of Celebrían's captivity in the Misty Mountains together. Afterwards, she and Lord Celeborn join the procession of Elrond's house and travel to Minas Tirith to attend the wedding of Arwen and Aragorn.
Galadriel is mentioned by name several times along with few and far between physical appearances in Middle-earth: Shadow of War. She is referenced as heading the Blades of Galadriel, an order of Elven Warriors dedicated to hunting down the Ring-Wraiths, and with their state of undeath, hunt them down in perpetuity. The player largely interacts with the Blades throughEltariel as the last Blade of Galadriel, who references Galadriel several times. Supplemental information suggests that Eltariel in part views her position as one of exile, as she must operate so far from home in Mordor, and her task can never truely be accomplished with the Ring-Wraiths being banished from death. During the Blade of Galadriel DLC campaign, Galadriel projects herself to Eltariel numerous times over the course of the game's story to provide Eltariel with objectives and quests.
In popular culture
The name Galadriel has moved outside of Tolkien's work and into the wider world. Parents occasionally give it to their daughters. The Led Zeppelin songs Stairway to Heaven and The Battle of Evermore contain many references to Galadriel. The band Barclay James Harvest wrote a song entitled "Galadriel". Galadriel was the given name of the main character in the Katherine Paterson novel The Great Gilly Hopkins. The novel Panic describes a group of computer hackers known simply as "Galadriel Jones and the Elves". Since Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim was released, the Elven names of Galadriel, Legolas, and Elrond have often been used by fans to name their characters.