Title: Istari
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Order_of_Wizards

Istari
The Order of Wizards (Quenya: Heren Istarion), or simply Wizards (Q.: Istari), were a group of Maiar sent to Middle-earth by the Valar in the early Third Age around TA 1050 when the "Necromancer" became active in Dol Guldur. They were embodied as elderly Men and entrusted to aid the Free Peoples against the threat of Sauron's conquest by lending them their wisdom and counsel. They were originally known as Five Guardians and were members of the Guardians around Cuiviénen.

History
After Oromë was called to another Council of the Valar, five Maiar - known as the "Five Guardians" - were sent to join Melian and the other Guardians in watching over the Elves at Cuiviénen and protecting them from Melkor's emissaries.

Guardians of the Free Peoples
In the Undying Lands around TA 1000 of the Third Age, Manwë, came to believe that Morgoth's successor, Sauron, who had been defeated at the end of the Second Age, was returning to power. He then summoned a council which concluded with the Valar choosing to send three emissaries to Middle-earth. Their mission would be to both reassure the Free Peoples that the Powers had not abandoned them and guide them against the new Dark Lord. Only two Maiar volunteered: Curumo (Saruman) sent by Aulë, and Alatar (Morinehtar), sent by Oromë. Manwë summoned Olórin (Gandalf), asking if he would go as the third messenger. Olórin claimed he was too weak and that he feared Sauron. However, Manwë said that was all the more reason to go, and he commanded him go, whereupon Varda said, "Not as the third." Yavanna asked Curumo to take Aiwendil (Radagast) also, and Alatar also took his friend Pallando (Rómestámo) as his companion. The emissaries were expressly forbidden to control the Free Peoples or to match the Dark Lord's power with power and if they deviated from their appointed task they would be cast out and over time their forms would begin to wane (however this wasn't clearly enforced).

The Wizards were known by various names and were arrayed in different colors. Of those who came to Middle-earth, five are known. After arriving in Middle-earth, the two Blue Wizards apparently went east before the War of the Ring; whether they played a part in the events of that war is unknown, but they may have influenced events to weaken Sauron in the long term. Radagast the Brown concerned himself mainly with plants and animals, and lived in Mirkwood for many years, before he was driven out when Sauron came to Dol Guldur. Saruman the White and Gandalf the Grey spent their time among Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Saruman was wise and respected, later becoming the head of the White Council in TA 2463. However, he became prideful and jealous of the Grey Pilgrim, whom he viewed as a rival. As he studied Sauron and the lore of the Rings of Power, Saruman came to envy Sauron's power, leading him to desire the One Ring for himself. As he lost himself to greed and power, he secretly abandoned his duties and hindered Gandalf's efforts but deceitfully maintained his cover for some time. By TA 3000, the White Wizard became ensnared by the Dark Lord, who made him his vassal and a traitor to the White Council, although Saruman planned to betray his master and claim the One Ring. Gandalf, however, stayed true to his mission, becoming the chief mover of the resistance to Sauron. Most notably, he set in motion the Quest of Erebor, which ultimately prevented a potential union between Sauron and the Dragon Smaug.

At the end of the Third Age, the Wizards passed from sight, because with the defeat of Sauron (via the One Ring being destroyed for good), and their work was done. Gandalf had chiefly fulfilled the role of "Enemy of Sauron", having both raised the Free Peoples against him and orchestrated the destruction of his One Ring. After the War of the Ring, Gandalf passed over Belegaer with the Last Riding of the Keepers of the Rings. Radagast remained in Middle-earth, tending to the wilderness for a time but eventually left Middle-earth too and returned home. Having acted out Sauron's will as his two-faced puppet, Saruman was defeated and banished from the Istari order by Gandalf. Saruman later imposed a terror regime in the Shire, but was overthrown and killed by his own mistreated footman; Saruman's spirit was barred from ever returning to either Aman or Middle-earth due to his treachery. The fate of the Blue Wizards is unknown but it is assumed that they too eventually returned to the Timeless Halls.

Relationship with Free Peoples
The Istari became well-known among the various races of Middle-earth over the centuries. Relationships between the Free Peoples and the Wizards varied, however, as the Free Peoples as a whole were unaware of the Wizards' true origins and their true nature as Maiar. Inevitably, questions began to be asked about the Wizards, though no firm answers were ever found.

The Elves most of all strongly suspected that the Wizards were far more than they appeared and, despite their natural form, were certainly not of the race of Men given their preternatural skill in magic and their prodigious physical and mental gifts. As such, the Elves respected and revered the Wizards for their wisdom and power but only to an extent; they were usually disinclined to follow the Wizards' counsel as most Elves still believed themselves superior to the Wizards overall. Men interacted less with the Wizards. They did not suspect the Wizards of being more than they appeared, as the Elves did, but acknowledged that they possessed power and knowledge beyond the understanding or the reach of ordinary men. They too respected the Wizards and looked to them occasionally for counsel, but were prone to misinterpreting said counsel as commands rather than guidance and disliked the thought of Wizards taking charge in their affairs. The Dwarves and Hobbits had the least amount of contact with the Wizards. Hobbits viewed them as little more than unusual and strange magicians that caused unnecessary trouble, preferring that they remain apart (with the notable exception of the Tooks).

Appearance
The Wizards resembled elderly Men, but their age appeared to never advance. Despite their old appearance, they possessed physically strong bodies equal to those of Elves, and highly intelligent minds. Each of the Istari carried a staff, was associated with a color, and possessed a rank within their order. These ranks are not all clearly specified, save for that of Saruman, who was the highest as the White Wizard. After Saruman's treachery, this position was assumed by the reborn Gandalf.

Powers & abilities
Despite their outward appearance as old men and inability to challenge Sauron directly, the Istari were among the most powerful beings to walk Middle-earth. While they could be hindered, harmed and even killed as with other races, death for them was merely temporary, as they simply returned to the Timeless Halls upon death whereupon the One would send them back to Middle-earth as many times as needed until their task was complete, as was seen with Gandalf's death and resurrection. Once their task was completed, the Istari were to return to the Timeless Halls. Only Gandalf, as a Ring-bearer, was allowed to go embodied to the Undying Lands.

True to their name, the Wizards each possessed magical powers that allowed them to perform feats; their power was reputedly at least equal to that of the Elves. Each Wizard carried and utilised a powerful staff, through which he channelled and performed most of his spells and magical actions. They could, if needed, use magic independently of their staffs, such as telekinesis and healing. Through their magic, they could cast illusions, shoot firebolts, summon lightning strikes, heal grievous wounds, hurl enemies around with ease, conjure protective shields, disintegrate entire structures and even ensnare the minds of other beings. Yet, for all their power, the Istari were expressly forbidden by the Valar from openly using their magic except in times of great need and as such they (with the exception of Saruman) more often relied on their wisdom, quick-thinking and reasoning skills to overcome challenges.

Members
Saruman the White, also known as Curumo, Curunír, Tarindor, Sharku, and "Sharkey", he is a Maia of Aulë. Originally the chief and greatest of the Istari order, as well as head of the White Council, after becoming the duplicitous vassal of Sauron, he renamed himself Saruman of Many Colours. Cast out from both the White Council and the Istari order by a resurrected Gandalf, he is ultimately killed by his own minion, Gríma Wormtongue, at the end of the War of the Ring.
Gandalf the Grey, also known as Olórin, Mithrandir, Tharkûn, and Incánus, is a Maia of Manwë and Varda, and the wisest of them all. He was a member of the White Council. After he was killed by a Balrog, he was sent back by Eru as Gandalf the White, the new chief of Istari and the "Enemy of Sauron". Wielder of the sword Glamdring and keeper of Narya, the Ring of Fire, he is successful in his mission to defeat Sauron. He ultimately returned to Valinor at the end of the Third Age.
Radagast the Brown, also known as Aiwendil and Hrávandil, is a Maia of Yavanna. A less notable member of the White Council, he is a lover of nature who mostly avoided participating the War of the Ring. He eventually returned to Valinor.
Alatar and Pallando, the Blue Wizards, also known as the Ithryn Luin, Haimenar and Palacendo or Morinehtar and Rómestámo. Maiar of Oromë, little is known about them, except that they travelled into the distant east of Middle-earth, and their fates are unknown.
Etymology
Istari was a Quenya word (singular: Istar). The Sindarin translation was Ithryn (singular: Ithron).