Title: Manwë
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Manw%C3%AB

Manwë
Manwë (Quenya: "Blessed One") was the leader of the Ainur, one of the Aratar, King of the Valar, husband of Varda, brother of the Dark Lord Melkor, and King of Arda. He was also known as Súlimo, Mânawenûz, or Valahiru, and lived atop Mount Taniquetil in Valinor, the highest mountain of the world. The winds and airs were his servants.

He was the greatest in power of all the Valar, as Melkor, although more powerful than Manwë, had rebelled against the will of Eru Ilúvatar and as such, had set himself against his peers. It is said that Manwë was the only Vala who took counsel from Eru from time to time.

Biography

Manwë was eldest of the Ainur that best understood the will of Eru. When Melkor created the discord in the Music of the Ainur, the Second Theme of Eru that rose to counter the discord used Manwë as its chief instrument. When Arda was formed, Melkor attempted to claim it for himself, but the other Ainur who had descended into the world took Manwë to be their lord. This was because of Manwë's understanding of the will of Eru, and the fact that Melkor was concerned only with his own self-aggrandizement. Manwë by contrast was entirely unconcerned with his own power, and wished only to prepare the world for the coming of the Children of Ilúvatar. He oversaw all of the Valar's early attempts to order Arda, but was unable to stop Melkor's rampages until the Vala Tulkas came to Arda to assist his brethren.

Afterwards, the Valar under Manwë made an abode on Middle-earth in the Isle of Almaren and constructed the two Lamps of the Valar to provide light to the world. But Melkor destroyed the lamps, and the Valar retreated to the continent of Aman, which they heavily fortified. Eventually, the Elves awoke in Middle-earth, and Manwë at last went with the other Valar to subdue Melkor. They succeeded, and Melkor was imprisoned in the Halls of Mandos. He extended an invitation to the Elves to journey to Aman and live there amongst the Valar. For the three Ages of Melkor's imprisonment, the Valar and the Elves lived in peace and happiness. But eventually Melkor was allowed to plead for pardon before Manwë again.

As Manwë was completely free of evil, he was unable to comprehend it, leading him to believe Melkor's lies concerning his reformation. He released Melkor from Mandos, whereupon Melkor began plotting the downfall of the Elves and the ruin of Aman's bliss. He began to cleverly spread lies amongst the Ñoldor, who soon grew to resent the Valar because of said lies. Eventually, due to the rebellious actions of the Ñoldorin prince Fëanor, Melkor's lies were uncovered, but he escaped before he could be recaptured. Soon thereafter, Melkor recruited the great spider Ungoliant and poisoned the Two Trees. He then murdered Finwë Ñoldoran, stole the Silmarils, and incited Fëanor's leaving Aman with most of the Ñoldor in rebellion.

Soon thereafter, Manwë learned that the rebellious Ñoldor had attacked and slaughtered many of the Teleri. As such, he forbade the Ñoldor from returning to Valinor once they left, and stated also that the Elves would receive no help from the Valar in their war against Morgoth. He then caused Valinor to be hidden by way of the Shadowy Seas and the Enchanted Isles to prevent the Ñoldor from returning.

To hearten the Eldar, he had Aulë fashion the Sun and the Moon, for he knew the rising of the Atani was coming soon, and sent Thorondor and the Eagles to watch them. After Morgoth's fall, Manwë cast him into the void. Manwë dressed in blue robes and had blue eyes. He wielded a scepter of sapphire made for him by the Ñoldor. The Vanyar were his favorite Elves, and they lived with him and Varda on Mount Taniquetil.

Maiar of Manwë
Eönwë, Manwë's banner-bearer and herald.
Olórin (Gandalf), the second-in-command (and later leader) of the Wizards sent to Middle-earth to fight against Sauron, Manwë comforted him when Olórin showed uneasiness and fear of Sauron's powers.

Etymology
The name Manwë means "blessed one" or "blessed person", from the Quenya man ("blessed") and wë ("person").

Súlimo literally means "the Breather", from the Quenya súlimë ("wind") and Sindarin sûl ("wind").

His Sindarin name was Aran Einior, the "Elder King".

Titles
Elder King
King of Arda
Lord of the Breath of Arda
King of the Valar
Lord of the West
In other versions
In earlier versions of the legendarium Manwë and Varda were called with the title of Wanwavoisi and they were conceived as the parents of Eonwë (called Fionwë Úrion) and Ilmarë (called Erinti). Tolkien later abandoned this idea of the Children of the Valar.[