Title: Sauron
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Sauron

Sauron
"Now Sauron's lust and pride increased, until he knew no bounds, and he determined to make himself master of all things in Middle-earth, and to destroy the Elves, and to compass if he might, the downfall of Númenor. He brooked no freedom nor any rivalry, and he named himself Lord of the Earth. A mask he still could wear so that if he wished he might deceive the eyes of Men, seeming to them wise and fair. But he ruled rather by force and fear, if they might avail; and those who perceived his shadow spreading over the world called him the Dark Lord and named him the Enemy; and he gathered under his government all the evil things of the days of Morgoth that remained on earth or beneath it; and the Orcs were at his command and multiplied like flies."
—The Silmarillion, "Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age"


Sauron in the late Second Age
Sauron
Biographical information
Other names
Mairon, Annatar,
Gorthaur,
the Necromancer,
the One Enemy,
See more
Titles
Dark Lord,
Lord of the Rings,
Lord of the Earth,
King of Men,
See more
Birth
Before the Ainulindalë
Death
March 25, TA 3019,
Battle of the Morannon (physical death only); Immortal
Realms
Dor-na-Daerachas (First Age),
Mordor & Dol Guldur
(Second & Third Ages)
Weapon
Powers of the Maiar, the One Ring, dark sorcery, mace, sword
Physical description
Race
Ainur (Maiar)
Gender
Male
Height
Variable until SA 3319
(physical body)
9 feet 2.1 inches (\(2.78\) m) in the Lord of the Rings films

Culture
Maia of Morgoth
(initially of Aulë)
Media portrayal
Actor
Sala Baker (The Lord of the Rings film trilogy),
Charlie Vickers (The Rings of Power),
Jack Lowden (The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power - Season Two prologue)
Voice
Alan Howard
 (The Lord of the Rings film trilogy),
Benedict Cumberbatch
 (Hobbit trilogy),
Steve Blum
 (Shadow of Mordor and Shadow of War),
Fred Tatasciore
 (The Battle for Middle-earth II)
Sauron (Quenya; ˈsaʊr or ˈθaʊr), the eponymous Lord of the Rings, was the greatest fallen Maia, a former renowned disciple of Aulë, the chief agent of the first Dark Lord Morgoth in the Elder Days (First Age), the second Dark Lord, the maker of the One Ring, and self-proclaimed ruler of the Middle-earth in the Second Age and near the end of the Third Age.
In the Days before days, Sauron was corrupted by Melkor (later named Morgoth) to betray the Valar and serve him. He served as Morgoth's chief lieutenant throughout the First Age. After Morgoth's ousting by the Valar at the end of the First Age, Sauron went into hiding out of pride and shame. To the Sindar of Beleriand, Sauron was known as Gorthaur in the First Age.

Sauron returned to Middle-earth about 500 years into the Second Age, becoming the second Dark Lord and plotting to conquer Middle-earth as his former master had. After deceiving the Elves into making the Rings of Power, Sauron deceitfully forged the One Ring, which he intended to use to control all other Rings as part of his plot to bend the wills of everyone else to his. From then, he grew in power significantly.

After acknowledging the might of the Númenóreans at the end of the Second Age, Sauron caused the Downfall of Númenor, but was eventually defeated in the War of the Last Alliance of Elves and Men united under Gil-galad and Elendil. In the final battle, Isildur cut the One Ring from Sauron's hand, destroying his corporeal form and robbing him of much of his power. Then, after centuries of lying dormant and regaining strength, Sauron returned openly to power late in the Third Age and again strove to dominate Middle-earth. Ultimately, however, the One Ring was destroyed for good after being cast into the fires of Mount Doom, which not only cost him all his power, but also caused him to become a permanent shadow, who had no chance to take form or gain any power ever again.

In the Days before days, Mairon was as Eru had created him: good and noble. His greatest virtue was his love of order and perfection, and dislike of anything wasteful.citation need However, this would also prove to be the cause of his betrayal and downfall, as Mairon saw in Melkor the will and power that would help him achieve his personal ends quicker than if he pursued them alone. However, while Melkor wanted to either control or destroy Middle-earth itself, Mairon's desire was to dominate the minds and wills of its creatures for what he perceived to be their own benefit. To see his marvelous designs through, Mairon sought to increase his innate power, so he betrayed the Valar and joined Melkor, soon becoming his chief agent.

After allying himself with Melkor, Mairon feigned loyalty to the Valar, which allowed him to secretly inform his master of his dealings with them. When Melkor established his strongholds in Middle-earth, Mairon left Valinor and openly declared his allegiance, becoming a recognized foe of the Valar.

First Age
"In all the deeds of Melkor the Morgoth upon Arda, in his vast works and in the deceits of his cunning, Sauron had a part, and was only less evil than his master in that for long he served another and not himself."
—The Silmarillion, Valaquenta, "Of the Enemies"
As Melkor's lieutenant, Sauron commanded the fortress of Angband. It was with Sauron's aid that Melkor was able to breed Orcs, in mockery of the Children of Ilúvatar. At the beginning of the Battle of the Powers, Sauron feigned a resistance against the Valar at Angband, thus allowing Melkor to muster forces at Utumno unnoticed. After both Angband and Utumno were sacked and Melkor captured, Sauron was not found; in their haste to both capture the first Dark Lord and remove him from Middle-earth, the Valar overlooked Sauron's escape.

Sauron "controlled things" in Melkor's absence: Angband's reconstruction began, and the Orcs there multiplied under his command. Possibly aware of the Great March, Sauron may have harried the Elves on their journey, directing Melkor's servants abroad or affecting the weather. The Sindar Elves in Beleriand called him Gorthaur, meaning "dread abomination", while others of the Eldar had named him Sauron, meaning "the abhorred" or "the abominable" (a mockery of his original name). Under Sauron's regency, Angband was almost ready by YT 1495, with Orc armies already prepared by him when Melkor returned.

Towards the end of the First Age, the Ñoldor Elves left the Blessed Realm of Valinor in the Utter West (against the counsel of the Valar) in order to wage war on Melkor (who they named Morgoth) following his theft of the Silmarils of Fëanor, enchanted gems that glowed with light from the now-destroyed Two Trees of Valinor. In that war, Sauron was counted as the "greatest of Morgoth's servants that have names" and was soon feared as a lord of phantoms and dreadful beasts, a shape-shifter and sorcerer.

When Morgoth left Angband much later to corrupt the newly awakened Atani (Men), Sauron directed the war against the Elves. Commanding "a host of Balrogs" by one account, he seized the Elvish isle of Tol Sirion from its warden, Orodreth, and turned it into Tol-in-Gaurhoth, the Isle of werewolves. There he established himself as the Lord of werewolves, with both Draugluin, sire of the werewolves, and Thuringwethil, a Vampire herald, at his side.

After the Dagor Bragollach in FA 456, Sauron was bidden by Morgoth to destroy Barahir, ally of Finrod, King of Nargothrond; Sauron ensnared Gorlim, who was captured by his hunters, and interrogated him about the outlaw-lord's location. Gorlim refused to tell them anything, even under torture, until Sauron himself came forth and bartered with the man. Gorlim asked for his wife Eilinel, whom he thought captured. Thus, Sauron agreed and Gorlim yielded the information. However, Morgoth's agent then revealed that Eilinel was dead, and he put Gorlim to death afterward. Sauron then sent Gorgol the Butcher's horde to slay Barahir and his company. Barahir's son, Beren, evaded this fate and after news of his deeds reached Morgoth. Sauron at the helm of an army of Orcs, werewolves and other fell beasts started hunting him.

In the Quest for the Silmaril, Beren and Finrod were captured by Sauron when they tried to sneak past Tol-in-Gaurgoth in Orc disguises. Sauron then defeated Finrod in a duel with songs of power, as told in The Lay of Leithian. Stripping them of their stolen garb, he cast them into the dungeons where Werewolves devoured their companions; Morgoth's vassal hoped to terrify them into revealing their quest. When one of Sauron's werewolves came to attack Beren, Finrod wrestled with and killed it, but died soon after of his injuries.

Soon afterward, Lúthien and Huan the wolfhound arrived at the bridge of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. Sauron sent his servants to capture Lúthien, but all were slain by Huan, including Draugluin, but he fled and told his master that Huan was there. Sauron was aware of the prophecy that stated that Huan could not be slain save by the greatest wolf that had ever lived. As such, Sauron took the form of a werewolf and resolved to kill Huan and capture Lúthien. His form was so monstrous that as he charged down the bridge even Huan was forced to spring aside. But Lúthien possessed the ability to cast spells of sleep, and had one such spell active upon her when Sauron attacked. Sauron was momentarily impacted by the spell as he lunged at her, and Huan took advantage of this brief distraction to leap upon Sauron.

In the end Huan took Sauron by the throat and subdued him, and though Sauron attempted to shapeshift into a serpent and escape, Huan's grip upon his throat was too strong. Lúthien demanded then that Sauron yield to her the tower and the isle. She knew that Huan could not kill Sauron; as a Maia he was immortal. But she knew as well that Sauron had built up a great deal of power in his corporeal form, and that if Huan destroyed it, that power would be lost. So she mocked him with the possibility of having to flee back to Angband, powerless and without a body, to endure the scorn of Morgoth. Ultimately, Sauron was not willing to endure such shame, and chose to surrender Tol-in-Gaurhoth to her rather than have his flesh destroyed. Huan released him and he fled in the form of a "vampire".



"He repents in fear when the First Enemy is utterly defeated, but in the end does not do as was commanded, return to the judgement of the gods. He lingers in Middle-earth. "
—The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, "Letter 131"
After his defeat by Lúthien, Sauron played little part in the events of the First Age (possibly hiding from Morgoth's scorn or wrath). After his former master was defeated and taken to Valinor in chains at the end of the First Age, Sauron approached the victorious Host of the West and pled with Eönwë for mercy. However, Eönwë did not have the authority to pardon a being of his own order, and commanded Sauron to return to Aman to be judged by the Valar. It is not known for certain whether Sauron was genuinely repentant, daunted by the Host's victory, or some combination of the two. Regardless however, Sauron's pride and fear ultimately won out and instead of returning to Valinor, he fled and hid in Middle-earth.

Second Age
Forging of the One Ring
"Very slowly, beginning with fair motives: the reorganising and rehabilitation of the ruin of Middle-earth, 'neglected by the gods', he becomes a reincarnation of evil, and a thing lusting for Complete Power – and so consumed ever more fiercely with hate (especially of gods and Elves). "
—The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, "Letter 131"
After remaining hidden and dormant for five centuries, Sauron began revealing himself once more. At first his wishes were those of a reformer: he fancied that, with "the Valar (including Melkor) having failed", he would reorganize and heal Middle-earth. But his pride became boundless and his lust for absolute power, initially only the means to a noble end, became the end itself, leading to him going back to his evil deeds. He desired to be a god-king and to be worshipped by all rational creatures. Sauron's hatred for the Valar grew, regarding "the motives of Manwë as precisely the same as his own".

"A new shadow arises in the East. It is no tyranny of evil Men, as your son believes; but a servant of Morgoth is stirring, and evil things wake again. Each year it gains in strength, for most Men are ripe to its purpose."
—Gil-galad, Aldarion and Erendis: The Mariner's Wife

By SA 1000, he had gathered power and established himself in the land of Mordor, in eastern Middle-earth, and began building the dreaded Barad-dûr near Mount Doom. He gathered to his service all the Orcs "scattered far and wide in the Northern world" were under his dominion, as well as Trolls and other creatures from the days of Morgoth; Sauron also gained the allegiance of certain races of Men such as the Easterlings, "of old corrupted by Morgoth", and the Haradrim by promising them plunder, wealth and power. Although Sauron knew that Men were easier to sway, he sought to bring the Elves into his service, as they were far more powerful than any Men save the Númenóreans. By about SA 1500, Sauron deceptively put on a fair visage and called himself Annatar, the "Lord of Gifts". It is said that as Annatar he assumed the guise of an emissary of the Valar, ironically "anticipating the Istari".

He befriended the Elf smiths of Eregion including Celebrimbor, a descendant of Fëanor and the greatest living craftsman. Sauron would go on to counsel them in both new forms of metallurgy and magic. Not all the Elves trusted him, particularly Lady Galadriel, Elrond, and Gil-galad, High King of the Ñoldor. Some accounts say that he befriended the Elven smiths of Gwaith-i-Mírdain without the knowledge of Galadriel and Celeborn. In one version of the story, Sauron developed such a strong hold over Gwaith-i-Mírdain that he persuaded them to rebel against Galadriel and Celeborn which drove them to leave Eregion so he could work unopposed. Regardless, the smiths of Eregion gave themselves over to learning from him just as their ancestors had trusted and learned from Morgoth.

This is the Master-ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the One Ring that he lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of his power. He greatly desires it – but he must not get it.
—Gandalf the Grey, The Lord of the Rings, "The Shadow of the Past"

Eventually, Sauron gave the Elven smiths he worked with the knowledge and encouragement to forge magic Rings, which he infused with potent spells without their knowledge. These included the great Rings of Power while he deceitfully forged the One Ring in secret, to rule the Elvish rings. To ensure that the One Ring would control the other rings, he passed much of his power to it. Upon that ring Sauron wrote in Tengwar the Black Speech inscription,

Ash nazg durbatulûk, ash nazg gimbatul, ash nazg thrakatulûk, agh burzum-ishi krimpatul.
This translates as:

One ring to rule them all, one ring to find them, one ring to bring them all, and in the darkness bind them.

However, as soon as he put on his Ring the Elves sensed his treachery, and removed their Rings and hid them. Having raised the fortress of Barad-dûr in Mordor in SA 1600, Sauron then prepared ninety years for open war; his gathering of armies was opposed by the two "powerful enemies behind his back" in the East and South. The Elves managed to hide the three greatest of the Rings from him, but the other sixteen Rings of Power were either captured by Sauron, destroyed, or lost. To the Dwarves he had given Seven, but to Men he had given Nine, knowing that they would be the easiest to corrupt.

Despite having given Rings to the greatest of the Dwarven rulers, whatever plans Sauron had devised for the Dwarves would not come to pass. For when Aulë had crafted the fathers of the Dwarves, he had made them exceedingly sturdy of both mind and body in order to resist the predations, both physical and spiritual, of Morgoth's dark servants. This proved to be exceedingly fortunate for the Dwarves, for the Dwarf-lords who received the Rings did not fade and could not be influenced by Sauron even while he wore the One Ring. However, the Dwarves did not escape Sauron's maleficence unscathed, for the Rings kindled in the hearts of those who possessed them an insatiable lust for gold. Though this would make many of the Dwarven kingdoms exceedingly prosperous for a time, the obsession of the Dwarven ring-bearers with gold would ultimately bring much grief to their race. As Sauron predicted however, all nine of the Men to whom he had given Rings fell under his sway and became the Nazgûl, his deadliest servants.

Having grown "'greater', effectively" than Morgoth at the end, Sauron conquered nearly all of Middle-earth, with only Gil-galad's realm of Lindon being safe from his grasp. At his height during the Accursed Years, became known as the Dark Lord to the Free Peoples. However, he had not expected the intervention of the Númenóreans, scions of the Edain (and partial descendants through Elros, of Beren and Lúthien). The armies of the King of Númenor, Tar-Minastir, defeated Sauron's forces in the Battle of the Gwathló in SA 1700. Beaten but not wholly vanquished, Sauron fled back to Mordor with only his bodyguard and began rebuilding his strength over the next centuries.

"When Ar-Pharaz learned that Sauron had taken the title of King of Kings and Lord of the World, he resolved to put down the 'pretender'."
—The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, "Letter 131"
Towards the end of the Second Age, he was once again powerful enough to raise large armies to attempt to conquer Middle-earth. By this time, he assumed the titles of "Lord of the Earth" and "King of Men". He once again conquered nearly all of Middle-earth but his harassment of a number of Númenorian settlements along the western coasts brought him to the attention of Ar-Pharazôn, the most powerful King of Númenor the world had yet seen. Insulted by Sauron's claim to both dominion of the world and the title of "King of Men", when Ar-Pharazôn considered himself to be the true bearer of that mantle, Ar-Pharazôn decided to challenge Sauron and force him to swear fealty.

Life in Númenor
Ar-Pharazôn mustered an astounding Númenórean army that utterly eclipsed even Sauron's own. In SA 3261, the King landed in Umbar in Middle-earth with his troops and began the trek to Mordor. Sauron's armies were so overmatched that his forces fled from the Númenóreans as they approached Mordor, and it became quite clear to Sauron that he could not best Ar-Pharazôn by force. Thus when Ar-Pharazôn sent messengers to Barad-dûr demanding that Sauron acknowledge the Númenórean King's overlordship, Sauron descended from his fortress without any offer of battle and assumed a fair form. His appearance, mannerisms and flattery of the King confused and astonished the Númenóreans, for rumor of Sauron portrayed him to be anything but what he now presented. However, Ar-Pharazôn was not so entranced by Sauron's obsequiousness as his generals, and he demanded that Sauron come back to Númenor as a hostage.

Sauron feigned unhappiness at this development but was secretly delighted, for this presented him with an opportunity to destroy the Númenóreans from within. After only a few short years in Númenor he grew from captive to the King's most trusted adviser, and nearly all the King's court fawned upon him. Drawing on their fear of Death, he deceitfully converted many Númenóreans to the worship of Morgoth by lying that Morgoth had the power to save them from their mortality. As his power and influence reached its peak, he raised a great Temple for Morgoth in which he performed human sacrifices to the Dark Lord. Finally, he manipulated and deceived Ar-Pharazôn to rebel against the Valar and attack Valinor by lying that the one who claimed the Undying Lands would be immortal.

But here, Eru directly intervened—Númenor was drowned under the sea, and the great navy of Númenor was destroyed and the army that reached Aman was buried under mountains of falling rock and said to be imprisoned in the Caves of the Forgotten. The world was bent, so that thereafter, only Elven-ships could sail into the Utter West. Sauron's body was destroyed, but his spirit was not diminished, and he fled back to Mordor bearing the Ring, where he slowly rebuilt a new body and strength. Hereafter, he lost the ability to assume a fair shape, and ruled now through terror and force. A few Faithful Númenóreans led by Elendil were saved from the flood, and they founded two Realms in Exile, Arnor and Gondor, in Middle-earth. Ultimately, despite losing his ability to present himself as fair, Sauron had achieved an overwhelming victory in destroying Númenor, which rid him of his most powerful opposition by far in ruling Middle-earth.

Loss of the Ring
After learning that Elendil, whom he had especially hated in Númenor, had survived and was ordering a realm on his borders, Sauron made war on Arnor and Gondor. However during his absence in Númenor, Gil-galad, High King of the Ñoldor, had significantly increased the power of his own realm. In his haste to prevent Elendil from strengthening his kingdoms, Sauron alerted Gil-galad to his return before his forces were fully prepared. Now aware of Sauron's resurgent threat, Gil-galad allied with Elendil to create the Last Alliance of Elves and Men, and together they marched across Middle-earth to attack Sauron. They defeated his armies in the Battle of Dagorlad, and then invaded Mordor and laid siege to Barad-dûr for seven years. Finally, Sauron himself came forth and dueled with both Elendil and Gil-galad and slew them, shattering Elendil's sword Narsil beneath him as he fell. However, Sauron was so badly wounded in turn that he was not able to stop Isildur, Elendil's son, from cutting the One Ring from his finger with one of Narsil's shards. This destroyed Sauron's physical body, but his spirit endured and fled. Sauron's remaining forces were routed soon afterwards, and Barad-dûr was leveled to its foundations.

Third Age
"The Dark Lord is no longer on his throne, but his monsters are not wholly destroyed, and his dreadful servants, slaves of the Ring, endure as shadows among the shadows. "
—The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, "Letter 131"
Despite this defeat, the Dark Lord still was not fully vanquished. So long as the Ring existed, Sauron's spirit would always have the ability to endure and take shape once more. For the first millennium of the Third Age he lay in hiding, slowly recovering strength until he regained enough power to direct his old servants, the Nazgûl and other evil creatures ("orcs and trolls . wargs and werewolves"), against the Free Peoples.

The Necromancer of Dol Guldur

In TA 1000, Sauron became active once more, occupying the stronghold of Dol Guldur, the Hill of Sorcery, in southern Mirkwood in TA 1050, and working in secret. There, he used the guise of a dreaded sorcerer, called "the Necromancer", and the Elves did not yet discern that he was the Dark Lord returned. Around the same time, the Valar sent five Maiar as the Order of Wizards, to rally the Free Peoples of the World in countering his potential re-emergence. Though Sauron dismissed their presence "as a mere effort of defeated imperialists" (seemingly justified in the case of their chief, Saruman), Gandalf arose among them as "the Enemy of Sauron".

While the Dark Lord continued to scheme and gather strength, the Nine reappeared in TA 1300, and began steadily assaulting the Númenórean kingdoms in exile at his behest, ultimately destroying the North-kingdom of Arnor and gravely weakening the South-kingdom of Gondor. In the same period, foul things that still walked the earth or beneath it were stirred: the Northern Orcs of the Misty Mountains grew bolder in their incursions, while secretly raising strongholds and barring the passes between Eriador and the Vales of Anduin "according to the plan of their master in Dol Guldur"; the Dragons laid waste to the Dwarven mansions, consuming three of the Seven Dwarf-rings and claiming the treasure hoards. Guided by the emissaries of the Dark Lord, the Easterlings and other wicked Men also renewed their bitter feud with the Gondorians and Northmen, launching fresh attacks on the western lands.

"Before you could get round in the South, you would get into the land of the Necromancer, and even you, Bilbo, won't need me to tell you tales of that black sorcerer. I don't advise you to go anywhere near the places overlooked by his dark tower!"
—Gandalf, The Hobbit, "Queer Lodgings"

Suspecting that Sauron had indeed returned and that his hand coordinated the steady resurgence of evil, such as the actions of the Nazgûl, Gandalf infiltrated Dol Guldur in TA 2063 to confirm his suspicion, but the Dark Lord fled eastwards to conceal his identity. This marked the beginning of the Watchful Peace, which ended with Sauron's return to Dol Guldur in TA 2460 with renewed strength. In the same year, the One Ring was finally discovered by the Stoor Sméagol and his friend, Déagol. Sméagol murdered Déagol and took the Ring for himself. Sméagol was eventually so changed by the Ring's corruption he was given the name Gollum, ostracized from his people, and dwelt secluded, deep within the Misty Mountains. With Durin's Folk driven out from Khazad-dûm by Durin's Bane, Sauron began "to people Moria with his creatures" around TA 2480; it is quite possible that the Balrog itself "had been awakened by the malice of Sauron".



"Far away here, I wonder if you fully realize the strength of a great Dragon. But that is not all: there is a Shadow growing fast in the world far more terrible. They will help one another."
—Gandalf to Thorin II, Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle-earth, "The Quest of Erebor"
Following the sack of Erebor, Gandalf felt that Sauron would take advantage of Middle-earth's weakened state: Arnor was no more, leaving Rivendell and Lothlórien open to an attack, and the Dwarves of the Iron Hills were the only obstacle in regaining Angmar. Above all else however, he feared that Sauron would eventually forge an alliance with the dragon Smaug, whom the Dark Lord could use to terrible effect. In TA 2850, Gandalf entered Dol Guldur again and finally confirmed that the Necromancer was indeed Sauron himself. Eventually, the White Council put forth their strength and, with Saruman's approval, attacked Dol Guldur in TA 2941 in the hopes of ousting Sauron before he and Smaug could "help one another". The Wise were able to oust the weakened Sauron from Dol Guldur with relative ease, but Sauron had had ample time to prepare for their assault, and only feigned retreat, abandoning Dol Guldur willingly. He returned secretly to Mordor, where he would openly declare himself in TA 2951, and began preparations for his final war to dominate Middle-earth. However, shortly after Sauron's retreat from Dol Guldur, Smaug would be slain by Bard the First, eliminating the Dark Lord's most powerful potential ally.

War of the Ring

"Now of late we have learned that the Enemy has been among the Southro, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they were ever ready to His will-as have so many also in the East. I doubt not that the days of Gondor are numbered, and the walls of Minas Tirith are doomed, so great is His strength and malice."
—The Two Towers, "Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit"
Sauron bred immense armies of Orcs and other evil creatures and rallied Men from the east and south - many of which had served him in the past - to his banner. He also gathered his most terrifying servants, the Nazgûl, or Ringwraiths, each wearing one of the nine rings conceived for mortal Men. From among the Nine, Sauron sent Khamûl, the Second Chief, to resettle Dol Guldur and prepare it for war against Thranduil's neighbouring realm. He once again adopted the symbol of a lidless eye, and as he exerted his will over Middle-earth, the Eye of Sauron was recognized by all as a symbol of power and fear.

As part of his strategy against the kingdoms of Men, Sauron began to weaken Gondor by influencing Denethor II. Using the Palantír of Minas Ithil, the Dark Lord convinced the Ruling Steward, current owner of the Anor-stone, of his imminent victory; Denethor gradually succumbed to despair.

"Saruman fell under the domination of Sauron and desired his victory, or no longer opposed it."
—Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle-earth, "The Palantíri"
By TA 3000, the "shadow of Mordor reached out to Rohan". Through the Ithil-stone, Sauron communed with Saruman, who held the Orthanc-stone, and compelled him to betray the White Council and serve him with promises of power and "rich reward". Having become the Wizard's "dark master", Sauron then commanded Saruman to subjugate Rohan and form in Isengard a second pincer to crush Gondor. For the time being, Sauron tolerated the fact that Saruman was actually a faithless servant that coveted the Ring, as he could "read his thought even when he withheld information."

After Gollum was captured, Sauron had him tortured and learned that he once had a magic ring, and, from him, he heard the words Shire and Baggins. He deduced that Gollum's ring was the One Ring and released the creature in TA 3017, hoping that Gollum would unwittingly lead him to Baggins. But Gollum's trail was lost in the Dead Marshes, "where Sauron's emissaries. could not or would not follow him." The Dark Lord then learned that the creature had been captured by his enemies. Sauron decided to send the dreaded Nazgûl, to find the Shire and search for Baggins. To conceal the Nazgûl's mission and test Denethor's strength, Sauron launched an assault against Osgiliath in TA 3018. At the same time, his servants in Dol Guldur attacked Thranduil's realm, where Gollum was held, with orders to "to capture or kill Gollum". The creature, however, escaped both the Dark Lord and his enemies.

Although the Nazgûl found the Shire and came close to capturing Baggins at Weathertop, they ultimately failed to retrieve the Ring and thus returned to the Dark Lord empty-handed. Sauron then sent a Mordor-orc warband led by Grishnákh to join a group of Isengarders that was tracking down the Fellowship of the Ring. The Orcs ambushed the company at Amon Hen and successfully captured two Hobbits, but were slowed down by internal strife - partially caused by Saruman's disloyalty - and later slain on the eaves of Fangorn Forest by the Rohirrim.

Having "cheated h new master" by trying to claim the Ring for himself, Saruman made a final assault against Théoden King at Helm's Deep in hopes of conquering Rohan for Sauron and regaining his favor. The Wizard was defeated by the Rohirrim and Ents however, costing the Dark Lord one of his most powerful vassals, as well the large army of Isengard.

Shortly after Saruman's defeat, Peregrin Took looked into the Orthanc-stone and accidentally communicated with Sauron. At first, the Dark Lord believed he was talking to his servant and reprimanded him for neglecting to report. Realizing that the other surveyor was a Hobbit, Sauron then assumed that Pippin was Saruman's prisoner and tried to coerce information out of him. But shortly thereafter Aragorn took the palantír and revealed himself to Sauron, and seeing Aragorn, the Dark Lord concluded that his vassal had fallen and that Isildur's heir possessed the One Ring. Fearing that his enemies would use the Ring against him, Sauron sped up his plans and attacked the city of Minas Tirith in Gondor sooner than he had planned, seeking to raze the city and crush the last human resistance to his rule before his enemies could fortify it, and to prevent the Men of the West uniting under one king.

Due to the combined efforts of Gondor, Rohan, and the Dúnedain of Arnor, Sauron's army was defeated. Despite still possessing more than enough military strength to destroy Minas Tirith and easily conquer Middle-earth once Gondor fell, doubt began to grow in Sauron. As such, he watched and waited, hoping for a period of strife between Aragorn and other potential Ringlords in which he could move out and take the Ring for himself.

Downfall
"If it the Ri is destroyed, then he will fall, and his fall will be so low that none can foresee his arising ever again. For he will lose the best part of the strength that was native to him in his beginning, and all that was made or begun with that power will crumble, and he will be maimed for ever, becoming a mere spirit of malice that gnaws itself in the shadows, but cannot again grow or take shape. And so a great evil of this world will be removed."
—The Return of the King, "The Last Debate"
Despite their successful repulse of Sauron's armies at Minas Tirith, Gandalf and Aragorn knew that the bulk of Sauron's forces remained in Mordor, readying themselves for another, deadlier strike against the city. Filled as Mordor was with Sauron's troops, Frodo Baggins stood almost no chance of reaching Mount Doom undetected. In light of the situation, Aragorn called for a council consisting of the major commanders of all the forces present in Minas Tirith, and appointed Gandalf to be their commander until the crisis had passed. Gandalf made it clear to all those present that, despite their great victory, they ultimately could not hope to defeat Sauron's armies by force. Therefore, they had two options available. They could station their remaining force, considerably greater than it had been before the battle due to the reinforcements from Rohan and southern Gondor, at Minas Tirith and hope to endure Sauron's next attack. Or, they could take a force to the Black Gate and attempt to challenge Sauron directly.

This force, as Gandalf suggested, would only need to be great enough to offer battle, and the rest of their forces could remain behind to garrison Minas Tirith. This option, though suicidal for those involved, would serve to distract Sauron from gazing into his own land, through which the Ring Bearer would be traveling. Furthermore, Gandalf theorised that, once Sauron learned that a force too small to pose any real threat to him was on its way to the Black Gate to directly assault Mordor, he would likely believe that the leader of the attacking force would have the One Ring in their possession. Sauron would assume that the Ring itself would influence its wielder, who, in his pride and overconfidence in his newfound power, might be foolish enough to challenge Sauron's might with a force too small to assault Mordor in earnest.

Their plot worked, as Sauron marshaled most of his remaining forces and marched them towards Udûn to crush the Men of the West and regain his prize. This action left the Plains of Gorgoroth largely unguarded, allowing Frodo and Sam to reach Mount Doom with far less difficulty than otherwise. However, once Frodo reached the Cracks of Doom, he finally succumbed to the power of the Ring, and put it on. Immediately, Sauron became aware of the halfling, and turned his gaze towards the mountain. He frantically sent the Ringwraiths to retrieve the Ring, but was too late, as Gollum, after taking the Ring from Frodo, slipped and fell to his death into the Cracks of Doom. The Ring was unmade. The earth shook as a great shock wave rippled across Mordor, and the foundations of Barad-dûr were finally destroyed, causing the great fortress to fall into ruin once and for all. The cone of Mount Doom burst apart in a cataclysmic eruption that consumed the eight remaining Nazgûl.

With his source of power gone, Sauron was utterly defeated and his armies bereft of the driving will behind their conquest were swollowed up by the earth and destroyed. With the One Ring destroyed, Sauron was permanently robbed of his physical form, reducing him to a malevolent spirit that hovered above Mordor as a "huge shape of shadow, impenetrable, lightning-crowned, ...terrible but impotent," only to be blown away by a great wind; he had ended on the same path as his old master, Morgoth, and was condemned to a sleepless impotent malice that feeds on itself.

With the destruction of the Ring, the vast majority of Sauron's being and his power was forever lost. With that, Sauron's spirit no longer had the power to create a new body and take shape again. Though his indestructible mind and being were bound forever to Eä, Sauron had lost all power to effect his will upon the world and could never again grow in strength.

Etymology
The name Sauron is Quenya, meaning "the Abhorred". In Sindarin, it is translated as Gorthaur from gor ("horror, dread") and thaur ("abominable, abhorrent").

His original name was Mairon ("the Admirable", from maira meaning "admirable, excellent"), a name he used while in Númenor, adding the title "Tar" for "Tar-Mairon" ("Excellent king"). The Númenóreans themselves gave him the name Zigúr, meaning "Sorcerer" in Adûnaic. When disguising himself in the Second Age, he called himself Annatar ("Lord of Gifts"; anna = gift and tar = king, lord), Artano ("High-smith"), and Aulendil ("Friend of Aulë").

His name is sometimes seen written as Thauron (Þauron), an earlier pronunciation of Sauron.

Titles & epithets
The Dark Lord (also Dark Lord of Mordor or Second Dark Lord)
The Dark Power (also Power of the Black Land)
The Black One
The Black Hand
The Black Master
The Base Master of Treachery
The Deceiver
The Enemy (also One Enemy)
The Sorcerer
The Necromancer
The Nameless (also Nameless One or Nameless Enemy)
The Unnamed
The Shadow (also Shadow in the South, Shadow in the East, Shadow in the Forest)
The Ring-maker
The Lord of the Rings (also Lord of the Ring or Ring-lord)
The Lord of Gifts
The Lord of Barad-dûr ( also Lord of the Dark Tower)
The Lord of Mordor (also Lord of the Black Land)
The Lord of the Earth (also Lord of the World)
The Ruler (also Ruler of Middle-earth)
God-King
The King of Men
The King (also King of Kings)
In a letter to a reader, Tolkien once likened Sauron's role to that of the traditional Devil.

Character
Despite being the title character of The Lord of the Rings, Sauron never directly appears in the events of the trilogy. Nowhere is description given, in detail, of what he looks like.

In the time of The Silmarillion, however, Sauron was a shape-shifter, taking in one instance the forms of a serpent, a vampire, and a great wolf. After Morgoth's fall, Sauron appeared in fair form as "Annatar", the Lord of Gifts, and maintained this appearance until the fall of Númenor, in which he was unable to ever take a fair form ever again. The History of Middle-earth includes a passage vaguely describing how the Númenóreans saw him: "Upon that ship which was cast highest and stood dry upon a hill there was a man, but greater than any even of the race of Númenor in stature...And it seemed to men that Sauron was great; though they feared the light of his eyes.

"To many he appeared fair, to others terrible; but to some evil." A few clues are given as to Sauron's appearance as the Dark Lord, after he lost his ability to take a fair form: Tolkien described him in one of his letters as having the form of "a man of more than human stature, but not gigantic, and as an image of malice and hatred made visible". He apparently gave off great heat, such that Gil-galad was burned to death by his touch, and Isildur would describe Sauron's hand as "black, yet burning like fire".

Gollum, having apparently once seen Sauron directly, described him as having only four fingers on his black hand, suggesting that Sauron was unable to regenerate the finger from which Isildur took the One Ring, similarly to how the wounds Morgoth took from Fingolfin never healed.

In addition to his physical appearance, Sauron also apparently had an aura of incredible malevolence. A passage in The Silmarillion describes him as having a "dreadful presence" and daunting eyes.

In one of his letters, Tolkien made a brief comparison between Sauron and the Devil. Parallels can be drawn between the two based on their common triple status: fallen angel, deceiver and tyrant. Sauron's role as a personification of evil (similar to the Devil) is also supported by another letter regarding Sauron's personality:

In my story Sauron represents as near an approach to the wholly evil will as is possible. He had gone the way of all tyrants: beginning well, at least on the level that while desiring to order all things according to his own wisdom he still at first considered the (economic) well-being of other inhabitants of the Earth. But he went further than human tyrants in pride and the lust for domination, being in origin an immortal (angelic) spirit. Sauron desired to be a God-King, and was held to be this by his servants, by a triple treachery: 1. Because of his admiration of Strength he had become a follower of Morgoth and fell with him down into the depths of evil, becoming his chief agent in Middle-earth. 2. When Morgoth was defeated by the Valar finally he forsook his allegiance; but out of fear only; he did not present himself to the Valar or sue for pardon, and remained in Middle-earth. 3. When he found how greatly his knowledge was admired by all other rational creatures and how easy it was to influence them, his pride became boundless.
—J.R.R. Tolkien

Philosopher Peter J. Kreeft proposes that Sauron is in fact the main character of The Lord of the Rings, inasmuch as he has the largest significance to the work of good and evil in the story, given his shared essence with the Ring; and given the title's referral to him.

Powers & Abilities

Sauron was among the mightiest of the Maiar. Originally of Aulë's people, he acquired great "scientific" knowledge of the world's substances and how to use them. He would retain this knowledge throughout his reign as the Dark Lord in Middle-earth, using it to forge the One Ring and construct his fortress of Barad-dûr. Sauron also seemed primarily linked to the use of fire, and as Morgoth's chief lieutenant, his ability to tap into the fires in the Earth was of great value.

Among Sauron's chief powers were deception and disguise: In the First Age Sauron took on many forms. During his battle against Lúthien and Huan in The Silmarillion, he took on no less than four separate shapes: his "normal" shape, (some kind of terrible dark sorcerer), a great wolf, a serpent, and finally a vampire "dripping blood from his throat upon the trees" ("Of Beren and Lúthien," The Silmarillion). At the end of the First Age, Sauron took on a fair form to appeal to the Captain of the Host of the Valar and ask for pardon. In the Second Age, Sauron took up that fair form again and used it under the alias "Annatar" to deceive the Elves into creating the Rings of Power.

The level of deception required to fool the Elves of Eregion must have gone beyond simply taking on a fair form, since Sauron was literally instructing the Elves to make artifacts that, while capable of great good, were ultimately purposed for his own domination and were imbued with power to arrest the natural order of the world, yet the Elves were unaware of who they were dealing with until the eleventh hour, and only narrowly escaped his trap.

Centuries later, Sauron was able to deceive the Númenóreans and steer them directly to their own destruction under blatant false promises of eternal life. Such destruction is a testament to Sauron's manipulative and deceptive nature and ability to twist the perceptions of his enemies. This power was more than just cunning manipulation, however, as Sauron was (like most Maia) a shapeshifter. He presumably took the form of an Elf when living among the Elves for centuries and there is a passage in The Lost Road which says that he first appeared among the Númenóreans in a "manlike" shape but far taller than normal and with a terrible light in his eyes. However, this was an early version and later versions simply speak of his "fair form".

He was a great teacher in the ways of magic, able to offer training in necromancy and other arts of sorcery.

The extent, nature, and specifics of Sauron's power are largely undescribed. Like Morgoth, he was capable of altering the physical substance of the world around him by mere effort of will.

Though he rarely stooped to engaging in combat himself, Sauron could be a fearsome opponent on the battlefield. He was able to slay Elendil and Gil-Galad single-handedly, though the duel left him weakened. The mere touch of his hands could inflict fatal burns.

Weapon
After Sauron infused the greatest portion of his power, will and essence into the One Ring he simultaneously became both weaker and stronger. Stronger when he had the ring as the ring was made to augment the user's strength and confer additional abilities (such as bending the wills of those around him regardless of whether or not they were wearing a ring of power) and weaker when he was without it. Sauron's coporeal form was destroyed at least 3 times yet it was after the 3rd time when the ring was taken from him did it take the longest amount of time to regain his physical form and enough strength to marshal his forces while enacting his plans. While Sauron could not be permanently discorporated while the ring existed he was much weaker without it. However, due to the ring's existence, Sauron's power, unlike Morgoth's, was undiminished as Morgoth's great power was diluted when spread across Arda, but Sauron's was concentrated when placed within a single, small container.

Symbol

The symbol of Sauron was the Eye of Sauron, which he began using after the Downfall of Númenor. It was also called the Great Eye, the Eye of Barad-dûr, the Red Eye, the Lidless Eye, the Evil Eye and the Eye. It is clearly an exemplification of the Dark Lord's apparent all-seeing and all-knowing nature, stemmed by his vain belief in his God-King omnipotence.

In other versions
Since the earliest versions of the Silmarillion legendarium (as detailed in The History of Middle-earth), Sauron underwent many changes. Prior to their publication, his origins and true identity were unclear to those without full access to J.R.R. Tolkien's notes, so that early editions of the The Complete Guide to Middle-earth: The Definitive Guide to the World of J.R.R. Tolkien described Sauron as "probably of the Eldar Elves".

The forerunner of his character was Tevildo, "Prince of Cats", who played the role taken by Sauron in the earliest version of the story of Beren and Lúthien told in The Book of Lost Tales Part Two. Tevildo was soon replaced by Thû, the Necromancer, whose name evolved to Gorthû, Sûr, and finally to Sauron. Gorthû in the form Gorthaur remained in The Silmarillion. In the last publication of Beren and Lúthien, Thû is given as an alias of Sauron. Another prototype could be Fankil, who occupied the position of Morgoth's agent and seduced Men to do evil deeds, roles undertaken by Sauron in the published works.

According to The Notion Club Papers (and associated writings), Sauron was known in Númenor as Zigûr. Notes published in Parma Eldalamberon revealed that his original name had been Mairon, and that he styled himself as Tar-Mairon throughout his reign of terror. In Tal-Elmar's tale, published in The Peoples of Middle-earth, he is mentioned as "the King".

In adaptations
The Lord of the Rings film trilogy
"You know of what I speak, Gandalf. A great eye, lidless, wreathed in flame."
—Saruman to Gandalf, The Fellowship of the Ring.

As in the source material, Sauron is the primary antagonist throughout the films. He is depicted as an almost god-like entity whose mere presence, even when mediated by a medium like the palantír, causes great duress and terror. Most of his bidding is achieved through his greatest servants, the Nazgûl (chiefly the Witch-king of Angmar) and Saruman. In a display of flattery, the White Wizard once addresses him as "Lord of the Earth"; most characters refer to Sauron as "the Great Eye" (or simply "the Eye"), "the Enemy" or "the Dark Lord".

Sauron's original appearance is that of a nine-foot-tall armored figure. This iteration alludes to Tolkien's descriptions of "a man of more than human stature", with the horned helmet derived from the mention of his "lightning-crowned" shadow. But Jackson's Sauron also borrows elements from Morgoth's description in The Silmarillion, namely the dark armor he wears and the giant mace he wields (based on Grond). This physical appearance is seen only in the flashbacks of the Prologue, and very briefly in the centre of the Eye in an extended scene with Aragorn and the palantír in The Return of the King. Sauron's helmet was conceived by illustrator Alan Lee, and the rest of his armor was together imagined by Lee, John Howe, and Christian Rivers. Sauron's mace seen in the film had been first drawn by Warren Mahy. Sauron's primary, present-day appearance in the rest of Jackson's trilogy is as the Eye of Sauron, a titanic, flaming eye atop Barad-dûr. The feline appearance of this "astral" form is perhaps a reference to the forerunner of his character in the first drafts, namely "Tevildo", a fay who took the form of a great cat. When Sauron speaks, it is telepathically through the One Ring or a palantír; when he is voiced by Alan Howard. Sala Baker portrays his physical form.

Sauron was originally intended to appear as Annatar and in his physical form at the climax of The Return of the King, appearing at the Battle of the Morannon to fight Aragorn. However, this was ultimately scrapped from the film due to the fact it was not in the book and the developers believed it would take the main focus away from the Hobbit protagonists. Furthermore, Jackson believed it would take away from Aragorn's act of sacrifice.

Some of his background from The Silmarillion (including his former position as Morgoth's chief agent, his defeat in the Battle of the Gwathló and role in the Downfall of Númenor) is mentioned in the film tie-in The Lord of the Rings. Concept art and a deleted scene showed that the flashbacks would have seen Sauron killing Gil-galad in the War of the Last Alliance.

In the Prologue of The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring, the Dark Lord is shown forging the One Ring, seeking to dominate all life. From Mordor, Sauron's armies begins spreading across Middle-earth, enslaving the Free Peoples. In answer to his tyranny, Elendil and Gil-galad form the Last Alliance of Elves and Men and march against Sauron. As the Siege of Barad-dûr nears it end and defeat for the Orcs seems imminent, the Dark Lord himself appears and breaks through the Ñoldor and Númenórean ranks with his mace. After slaying Elendil with a swing of his weapon, Sauron breaks his sword, Narsil. He would have killed Elendil's son, Isildur, with his hot touch, but Isildur uses the shards of Narsil to cut the One Ring off from Sauron's hand, causing Sauron's form to disintegrate.

Though his body was undone, the spirit of the Dark Lord endured. As he slowly recovered his spent strength, he began stirring his servants: the Lord of the Nazgûl established himself as the Witch-king of Angmar, from where he destroyed Arnor before being driven out by the Elvish realms of Rivendell and the Grey Havens; the Easterlings, Haradrim and Corsairs were incited into several wars against Gondor; the Orcs of the Misty Mountains multiplied, occupied Moria and began blocking the ways between Eriador and the Anduin Vales. When he felt ready, Sauron reclaimed Mordor and began rebuilding Barad-dûr. Through the palantír, Sauron compelled Saruman into his service with promises of power; the Dark Lord was aware of his puppet's intention to usurp his place, but kept the White Wizard as "an instrument to be wielded and ultimately discarded". With the Elves leaving Middle-earth for the Undying Lands, the main obstacles in his way are the realms of Men. Sauron's strategy is to attack from both sides: on the eastern front he sends the Nazgûl led by the Witch-king against Gondor, and on the western front Saruman to crush Rohan. According to the Dark Lord's strategy, the attacks by his chief agents will keep the two kingdoms from helping one another. To further weaken the resistance, Sauron used his palantír to drive Denethor, Steward of Gondor, into madness and despair.

You cannot hide. I see you. There is no life in the Void, only death.
—Sauron, The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring

At the start of the film, Sauron had captured Gollum, from whom he learned through torture that the One Ring was now in the hands of a Baggins. At his command, the Nazgûl left Minas Morgul for the Shire, intent on slaying the Ring-bearer and recovering their master's prize. Owing to the planning of Gandalf, Aragorn the heir of Isildur kept the Hobbit and his companions safe and allowed them to reach Rivendell. Facing the threat of Sauron's imminent assault, whose urgency was increased by Saruman's defection to the service of the Dark Lord, Elrond and his allies decided that a Fellowship will help Frodo take the Ring to Mount Doom and destroy it. Sauron had also released Gollum, hoping perhaps to try follow him to the Ring-bearer.

In The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers, the Dark Lord makes the final preparations for the War of the Ring. In Mordor, his main army of Morannon Orcs is being readied, with legions of Haradrim and Easterlings passing the Black Gates to reinforce them, in spite of ambushes by the Rangers of Ithilien. In Isengard, his puppet, Saruman, has built him a second army of Uruk-hai to destroy Rohan, and then "form a second pincer with which to crush Gondor". Aware of his treacherous servant's gamble to claim the Ring first, Sauron sends his own Mordor-orcs led by Grishnákh to intercept Saruman's Uruk-hai with the captive Hobbits. Both Orc warbands are slain on the eaves of Fangorn Forest by Éomer's riders and the prisoners escape. Fearing his master's response to attempted betrayal, Saruman sends raiding forces of Orcs of Isengard and Dunlendings to ravage the Westfold and spread terror among Sauron's enemies. The Dark Lord's puppet launches a decisive attack on Théoden King at Helm's Deep; following the destruction of Saruman's army in the battle, Sauron's wrath is terrible and he prepares to exact full retribution.

In The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King, Sauron's loss of his servant, Saruman, prompts him to reveal another minion, the Witch-king. With Gondor as the chief symbol of resistance against him, he aims to destroy Minas Tirith, both to avenge the defeat at Helm's Deep and to capture the Ring-bearer (who he erroneously concludes is heading for the White City). The Witch-king has gathered a sizable army of Mordor-orcs and Easterlings, which are to be reinforced during the assault by the forces of the Haradrim and the Corsairs of Umbar. Sauron sees Pippin through the palantír captured from the his defeated puppet, Saruman, thinking he is the Hobbit who has the Ring. Pippin, however, has a glimpse into Sauron's mind, alerting the others of the Dark Lord's plan to destroy the White City. The Witch-king's army besieges the city, but is held back by its Gondorian defenders, temporarily routed by the arrival of the Rohirrim and finally defeated by Aragorn who summons the Dead Men of Dunharrow. He is then confronted by Aragorn through Denethor's palantír and shown the reforged Narsil, Anduril. His evil adversely affects Elrond's daughter Arwen, whom he shows to Aragorn, her lover, as if she were dead.

Meanwhile, Frodo the Ringbearer is captured on the borders of Mordor in Cirith Ungol by an Orc patrol. While he is rescued by his friend Samwise, his Uruk captor, Shagrat, escapes with Frodo's Mithril Coat which he brings to Barad-dûr. As the Captains of the West ride to the Black Gates, the Dark Lord gives the vest to his chief emissary. The Mouth of Sauron claims that Frodo has been captured and slain, hoping to dismay Gandalf and his allies with false information. The Eye nearly spots Frodo as he and Sam pass towards Mount Doom, but when Aragorn slays the Mouth, Sauron's attention is drawn to the Morannon instead. He contacts the heir of Isildur psychically, but is unable to sway his mind and a battle ensues at the Black Gate.

Only when Frodo claims the Ring in the Cracks of Doom does Sauron sense the Ring's presence and perceives Gandalf's trap: the battle had been but a distraction to buy time for the Ring to be destroyed. He sends the Nazgûl to retrieve it, but it is unmade when it falls into the lava with Gollum. With the Ring no more and much of his power spent, the Dark Lord can only look as his tower crumbles beneath him, until his very being is reduced to nothing. With Sauron overthrown, all of Mordor falls into the abyss, taking his Orc, and troll minions along with it and the eight remaining Nazgûls are destroyed in a firestorm along with their fell-beasts.

Sauron's maimed spirit is taken by the Void, "from which there could be no return".

The Hobbit film trilogy
"It has begun. The East will fall. So shall the Kingdom of Angmar rise. The time of the Elves is over. The Age of the Orc has come."
—Spoken in the Black Speech, as Sauron reveals himself to Galadriel
Sauron's role from The Hobbit is greatly expanded in Jackson's The Hobbit film trilogy, deriving from external source material such as Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle-earth and The Lord of the Rings' Appendices. Voiced by Benedict Cumberbatch, he is portrayed as one of the main antagonists. Though rarely seen, his plans are acted out by his servant, Azog, and he is shown to be in league with Smaug (at least in the extended edition). Some of his minions and even Thráin (affected by his imprisonment) refer to Sauron as "the One"; this show of reverence is also a symbol of blasphemous pride, for "the One" is rightfully an epithet of the creator, Eru Ilúvatar.

His first appearance is in the form of a black, humanoid ghost, alluding to Tolkien's description of Sauron as a man with blackened skin. When he later emerges from the shadowy mist, Sauron reveals himself in the shape of the Great Eye (similar to the one in Jackson's The Lord of the Rings film trilogy). The slit of the Eye is show as the Dark Lord's armored form, which upon being zoomed in repeats itself in an endless cycle of darkness, suggestive of Tolkien's description of the pupil as a "window into nothing".

After his defeat, the Dark Lord secretly re-emerged. Sauron secretly allied himself with Smaug and was paid homage to by Azog and his son Bolg, both chieftains of the Orcs of the Misty Mountains. The Dark Lord also summoned the Ringwraiths from their entombment in the High Fells of Rhudaur. Sauron wanted to re-establish the realm of Angmar, from where he could attack the Elven realms of Greenwood, Lothlórien, Rivendell and Lindon, and hold the Dwarves of the Iron Hills at bay. This, he reasoned, would leave the Mannish realms of Gondor and Rohan isolated when he himself returned to Mordor. He intended to begin this master plan by taking Erebor, expanding Angmar's domain further east and cornering the people of Rhovanion. This would also give him access to the riches of Erebor and allow him to unleash Smaug on the nearby realms. To do so, he settled in the ruined, abandoned fortress of Dol Guldur, casting his Shadow over Greenwood and becoming known to the nearby Woodmen as "the Necromancer". As a first step in his plan, Sauron sent his servant, Azog, to conquer the deserted Moria; through defeated at the Battle of Azanulbizar, Azog delivered his master both Thráin, as a prisoner, and the Ring of Thrór, the last of the Seven Dwarf-rings. The Dark Lord chose the Defiler to be his general; for his part, Azog was more concerned with exacting vengeance on Thorin Oakenshield rather than his master's plans. Sauron's growing power stirs awake most fell things: giant Spiders of Ungoliant's bloodline (through Shelob) breed under his dominion in Dol Guldur and start spreading throughout southern Mirkwood; Trolls descend from the Ettenmoors upon the settlements of Men; Moria Orcs, Wargs and other war beasts gather in the cess pits of Dol Guldur. With Sauron's blessing, Azog begins hunting Thorin and his Company, in order to stop them from reaching Erebor and slaying their secret ally, Smaug. All these ill omens trouble Gandalf, who begins to fear that the ancient Enemy has returned.

In The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey, the effects of Sauron's presence in Mirkwood, from the sickness of the forest to the giant Spiders that now lurk there, rouse the suspicions of Radagast. Following two of Ungoliant's spawn to their nest, the Brown Wizard begins to investigate the ruins of Dol Guldur before he is ambushed by the resurrected Witch-king of Angmar. Radagast averted the attack and seized the spectre's dagger, a Morgul blade. As he picked up the blade, the Brown Wizard sees the Necromancer emerging from the shadows and immediately leaves, barely escaping with his life from the Bats which reside in the fort, and setting out to find Gandalf.

Gandalf himself sees the obvious signs of Sauron's return: three Trolls have left the Ettenmoors to raid a farm on the outskirts of Staddle; Gundabad Orcs led by Yazneg (in Azog's name) are pursuing Thorin and Company. At the meeting of the White Council in Rivendell, the Grey Pilgrim tries to point out to his peers that the last of the Seven Dwarf-rings has mysteriously "vanished" and that if Smaug should side with Sauron, he "could be used to terrible effect". Though Gandalf's proposition to investigate Dol Guldur and aid the Quest of Erebor was overruled by Saruman, Galadriel believed Gandalf that "something moves in the shadows unseen" and that "every day it grows in strength" and so urged him to press on and confirm the identity of the Necromancer.

Sauron's power drew the One Ring out of its hiding with Gollum under the Misty Mountains. It intentionally fell out of Gollum's pocket in order to be acquired by a Goblin imp who fell into his cavern, but Gollum killed the Goblin. Bilbo Baggins, a Hobbit and a member of Thorin's Company, was captured by the Goblins and fell with the imp, ending up taking the Ring, which he managed to keep a secret of all but Gollum (whom he evades) and Gandalf.

In the The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug, Gandalf's meddling in the Quest of Erebor forces Sauron to show his hand early. Now preparing to make his war, Sauron sends Bolg to summon Azog to Dol Guldur. Dismissing his servant's insolence and petty vendetta with Oakenshield, the Dark Lord grants him command of his armies; Azog nonetheless sends his son, Bolg, to hunt Thorin in his stead. The gathering of Moria Orcs at Dol Guldur has not gone unnoticed by Beorn, who warns Gandalf that foul things in the Necromancer's service have infested the Anduin Vales. As Thorin's Company enters Mirkwood, Gandalf sees the Red Eye (being Sauron's banner) on an Elven statue, a sign of defilement and of the Enemy's return. Compelled to go investigate the Ringwraiths' tombs in the High Fells of Rhudaur, the Grey Pilgrim finds them open. Conferring with Radagast, Gandalf confirms that the Necromancer cannot be mere human, and that given the Nine answer only to one master, the presence in Dol Guldur is none other than Sauron himself.

Gandalf sets for Dol Guldur, and asks Radagast to summon Galadriel. He discovers Thráin as a prisoner in Dol Guldur, who also reveals the alliance between Sauron and Smaug. Fleeing from Azog, Gandalf and Thráin are confronted by Sauron himself. The Grey Pilgrim is unable to save the old Dwarf's life, but fends the Dark Lord off before he is fully revealed in his true form and identity. Sauron effortlessly reduces Gandalf's staff to ashes and defeats him. He has also perhaps informed Smaug of the Thorin and Company's approach, but when Bolg tracks the Dwarves to Lake-town he sends messengers to inform Sauron that Thorin had already left for Erebor. In turn, Sauron unleashes Azog's army, to march upon the Lonely Mountain.

In The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies, Sauron kept Gandalf imprisoned, hoping to draw out the keepers of the other two Rings of Power kept by the Elves. He retrieves the Morgul blade from him and sends the Keeper of the Dungeons to harvest the Ring Narya from the captive Wizard. His Orc minion is easily crushed when Galadriel arrives to rescue Gandalf. However, as she and an her unconscious ally leave, they are surrounded by the Nine. Seemingly cornered by the Nazgûl, Elrond and Saruman prove to be not far behind, and aid her in battle as Radagast enters and helps to get Gandalf out. After the Nine are defeated, the Dark Lord himself appears, and summons anew all the Nine, proclaiming a new Age under his dominion. But Galadriel reveals herself in wrath, banishing the Nazgûl and confronting the "servant of Morgoth". After a contest of wills, the Dark Lord chooses to flee into the East. Elrond suggests that Sauron will likely return to Mordor, and tells Saruman to warn Gondor to reset their watch on the black land. The White Wizard reassures him that without the One Ring, the Dark Lord will not be able to hold dominion over the land. Saruman then tells Elrond to take Galadriel back to Lothlórien and "leave Sauron to h", paving the final steps of Saruman's downfall.

Meanwhile, Azog's army sent by Sauron (and reinforced by Bolg's army from Gundabad) arrives at the Lonely Mountain but is held back by armies of Lake-men and the Woodland Realm (which have gathered there to besiege Thorin in Erebor for the sake of earning remunerations from his hoard) and of the Iron Hills (sent to Thorin's aid). Azog risks the course of the battle to draw Thorin out, and is defeated by the Dwarf. Legolas slays Bolg, while the reinforcing Orcs from Gundabad are defeated by the Great Eagles and Beorn, summoned by Radagast.

The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power

Annatar
Halbrand
Prologue
Annatar
Sauron
Actor
Charlie Vickers
Jack Lowden (Original body)
Morfydd Clark (Illusion of Galadriel)
Aliases
Halbrand
Titles
The Dark Lord
Occupations
Master smith
Valar-sent crafting consultant (fraudulent)
Lord of Eregion (usurped)
Dark Lord
Race
Maiar
Weapon
Sword
Spear
Magic
Morgoth’s Crown
First seen
"A Shadow of the Past"
"Adrift" (as Halbrand)
Spoiler
In The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power, Sauron is the main antagonist. He desires to become the new Dark Lord and conquer the world, no longer by fighting, but by taking power through the flesh, dominating the minds of other races. His adversary is Adar, who has already tried to kill him and wants to free the orcs, his children, from Sauron's domination.
During the First Age, he was Morgoth's loyal lieutenant. He participates in the War of the Jewels and kills Finrod, Galadriel's older brother, leaving a strange mark on the elf's body. Galadriel vows to pursue him for revenge and to rid Middle-earth of Morgoth's last lieutenant. Exploring the north of Forodwaith, she discovers the famous mark in an abandoned orc citadel.  At first glance, this mark has no meaning, but the Elf later discovers that it is a map of the Southlands intended for the Shadow Servant, to tell them where to go in case of defeat.

At the beginning of the Second Age in Dúrnost, Sauron, seconded by Adar, summoned the orcs. After Morgoth's defeat, he wants to become their new lord and conquer the world through the domination of the spirits of other races. The orcs, who have suffered greatly from Morgoth's wars, do not want him. One of them even tries to stab him. Adar lifts the Dark Lord's Crown to place it on his master's head, but turns it over at the last moment and plants it in Sauron's back. The orcs then rush to the Maia and stab him many times. While Adar checks to see if his enemy is dead, he opens his eyes and emits an intense light. A huge explosion takes place and the Forodwaith is covered in ice. Sauron's body is gone, only his clothes remain. Sauron's blood flows in the caverns beneath the citadel and forms a pond. It contains a black and stringy form that will feed on rats and insects to grow. Having enough strength, he manages to leave the mountain and, crawling in the snow, reaches the territory of the Men. There, he devours a traveler and finally has enough energy to transform into Halbrand. He leaves for the Southlands and meets refugees who are fleeing the orcs, including Diarmid, to cross the Sea and seek peace. This bears the coat of arms of the Kings of the Southern Lands, which comes from his family formerly in the service of kings. Halbrand decides to follow them. Their ship is destroyed by the Giant Sea Worms. Halbrand steals the pendant with the coat of arms from Diarmid who is trapped under a beam, just before the boat sinks. With a few survivors on a raft, they take in Galadriel who is swimming in the sea.

Here, Sauron takes on the identity of "Halbrand" some time after being struck down by Adar, who had become disillusioned with Sauron's cruelty towards the race of Orcs. He carried an insignia bearing the mark of the King of the Southlands that he claimed to have taken from a dead man, perhaps the last king himself.

Posing as a simple man fleeing from Orc attacks, he eventually comes to be on a raft in the Sundering Seas, with Abigail, Eamon, and others. It is here that he encounters the Elf Galadriel, who was swimming eastward to Middle-earth, shortly before "the worm" that had destroyed their ship returns and assails them. Sauron stays afloat by separating a section of raft from the others, who perish, and brings Galadriel on board, though he withholds his own story. In a storm that rolls in soon afterwards, Galadriel is dragged under by a weighted line, but Sauron dives in and rescues her. Exhausted by the strain, the two drift until found by a Númenórean ship commanded by Elendil.

Elendil brings them back to Númenor's capital of Armenelos and presents them to Queen-regent Míriel. Galadriel demands passage back to Middle-earth and nearly causes hostilities before Sauron intervenes and brokers an agreement for time to be taken before a decision. Sauron afterwards cautions Galadriel against causing any more disturbances. He soon causes his own disturbance, however, by provoking the guildsman Tamar and several of his friends by attempting to steal Tamar's guild badge, which Sauron desires to be able to gain working access to a blacksmith's shop. Tamar begins to physically attack Sauron, but is taken aback when Sauron retaliates, violently taking out Tamar and his fellows and leaving them seriously injured. Sauron allows himself to be arrested and thrown into prison for his actions.

Galadriel soon visits him in prison and chastises him for his deeds, though she also reveals a document recovered from Númenor's Hall of Lore, which identifies the insignia he wears as the symbol of the rightful ruler of the Southlands. Sauron states he found the insignia on a dead man, though Galadriel still believes him to be the rightful ruler. Eventually, after Galadriel succeeds in persuading Míriel to send an army to the Southlands to oppose Adar, Sauron is released from captivity and starts working as a blacksmith. Galadriel finally convinces Sauron to join the Númenórean expedition to Middle-earth after retelling her battles and losses.

Upon reaching Middle-earth and sailing up the Anduin to the margins of the Southlands, the Númenórean cavalry ride across the Ephel Dúath to Tirharad, where its inhabitants are heavily beleaguered by Adar's troops. Though the Númenóreans make quick work of the Orcs, Adar flees on horseback carrying what is believed to be the Orc Sigil Hilt forged by Morgoth, that Adar had been seeking. Galadriel and Sauron pursue Adar through the nearby forest, until Sauron dismounts him and would have killed him, seeking revenge, before being stopped by Galadriel. After Galadriel questions Adar after putting him in shackles, "Halbrand" is introduced by Míriel to the villagers of Tirharad as the rightful king of the Southlands. The people gladly accept him, but shortly after are shocked when Orodruin suddenly erupts. In the ensuing chaos, Sauron receives a serious wound to his abdomen, and is brought to the Númenóreans' camp with the other Southlander refugees. Upon Galadriel's return, she determines his wound requires Elvish healing, and though he declares his intent to stay and fight for the Southlands, he accompanies Galadriel on horseback to Eregion.

In Ost-in-Edhil, he soon recovers from his injury and while looking for Galadriel he discovers Celebrimbor's forge, wherein he meets the Master-smith himself and learns of the mithril fragment. He suggests the idea of an alloy to amplify the effects of the precious metal, and soon gains Celebrimbor's trust. Galadriel, however, is suspicious, after hearing Celebrimbor repeat phrases associated with the Dark Lord. After uncovering a document showing the line of Southland kings had been broken a thousand years before, Galadriel confronted Sauron, who effortlessly blocked her dagger attacks then entered her mind and so attempted to sway her to his side through a vision by claiming he desired to heal Middle-earth. She rejected his offer, and Sauron fled Eregion before the other Elves learnt of his identity. Galadriel did not tell Celebrimbor so that he would continue in forging the Three Rings, though Elrond discovered the truth on his own, from the document she had discovered. Sauron, meanwhile, through unknown means, had returned to the newly-named land of Mordor.

In Mordor, Adar prepares for war against Sauron and forces the Southern men to swear allegiance to him. Halbrand has allowed himself to be captured and is brought before him. He negotiates the freedom of his people in exchange for information about Sauron that would help the elves forge a new weapon. Adar threw him in jail and had him tortured. Halbrand, locked up with a Warg, manages to overpower him and will use him to kill his torturer, Waldreg. Adar finally agrees to release Halbrand and send him to the elves to find more information about Sauron. Before letting him go, he asks Halbrand to lie down at his feet and swear loyalty to him. He swears loyalty to the Lord of Mordor, then sets off on horseback for Eregion.

Gil-galad, in Lindon, has learned from Galadriel that Halbrand is Sauron. He sends an urgent letter to Celebrimbor informing him of this news. The messenger is killed on the way and never arrives. Halbrand arrives at Ost-in-Edhil and asks to see Celebrimbor. The latter has promised Galadriel not to speak to the king of the Southlands again and leaves him at the door.

Celebrimbor finally goes to Halbrand and orders him to leave. Halbrand manipulates him. He makes him believe that he has seen Galadriel, that the Rings have saved the Great Tree and the Elves, but that Gil-galad has not even bothered to warn the master blacksmith. Finally, Celebrimbor brings him in. Halbrand asks him to make Rings for Men, but when Celebrimbor refuses, he tells him that he is in fact sent from the Valar to counter the Shadow. Halbrand suddenly disappears and then reappears in the fire in the form of Annatar. By further flattering Celebrimbor's ego, calling him the Lord of the Rings, Celebrimbor will finally agree to forge rings for Dwarves and Men.

Galadriel, thanks to Nenya, has a vision and understands that Sauron wants to forge more Rings of Power. She obtained permission to leave for the Eregion with difficulty, but under Elrond's orders. Halbrand has already entered his mind once and the High King and his Herald are afraid that he will be able to do it again.

Durin and Disa are received by Celebrimbor and Annatar, who offer to forge Rings of Power to heal the mountains of the dwarves, who have suffered from earthquakes, in exchange for Mithril. The offer was made to them rather than to the king, because the blacksmith knew that he did not like outside help. Durin is skeptical, suspicious of the Rings, and he doesn't like Annatar. Disa finally convinced him that any solution must be tried to save Khazad-dûm who had no more food.

Annatar tricks Celebrimbor into believing that Gil-galad has forbidden the making of any more Rings, and flatters the Blacksmith's vanity. The latter takes the bait. He writes to his king that he is closing the great forge, but is going to make the Rings for the Dwarves and the Men. It is the ultimate goal of his life, his masterpiece.

Durin III, having no solution for his kingdom, accepts the offer and brings the Mithril to forge the Seven Rings. He gives it to Celebrimbor, but Annatar takes it from him and holds it in his clenched fist before adding it to the molten metal and starting to forge the new rings.

Celebrimbor celebrates with Narvi the creation of Durin's Gates in Ost-in-Edhil. Annatar looks troubled. He argues with the blacksmith, he suffers for the men and asks for Rings for them. Celebrimbor doesn't want to, men are too easily corruptible, and even helped Adar. Annatar tells him about the great men of the First Age, assuring him that they can find good and noble men in the realms of Middle-earth or Númenor. Celebrimbor says no, Annatar accepts him, he will forge the Rings without him.

In the forge of Ost-in-Edhil, there is suddenly panic, the tools fly in the air. Celebrimbor comes running. Annatar explains to him that he made a ring with more Mithril, to limit the risk of corruption in men, and that when Mirdania tried it on to check the size, she disappeared. He would like the master blacksmith to help him not to make any mistakes. Following a flying hammer, Celebrimbor grabs his apprentice and removes the ring. Durin IV arrives just at this moment and wants to see the lord of the place. He informs the blacksmith of his father's strange behavior since he has the ring, he has become greedy and irritable, forgetting his past caution. Celebrimbor explains that they used the same process as for the Elven Rings, which work very well. Durin suggests that the problem may be with Annatar.

Meanwhile, Annatar goes to talk to the young elf who is recovering from her emotions. He tells her about this Invisible World that she saw when she put on the ring, where beings reveal their true form. He makes her believe that the dark and terrifying creature with ageless and merciless eyes that she saw there is Celebrimbor who is weakened by the creation of the rings and less resistant to the forces of evil. She believes him and promises not to mention her master's weakness to anyone, not even with him.

Celebrimbor returns to see Annatar, to find out if anything happened during the creation of the Rings of the Dwarves. Annatar replies that he didn't do anything himself, but that they created the Rings with their minds polluted by Celebrimbor's lying letter, telling the High King that he will not forge new rings. Celebrimbor does not want to denounce himself to Gil-galad, whose wrath he fears. Celebrimbor decides to forge the Nine Rings of Men, to balance those of the dwarves. They have to be perfect and even threaten these assistants with expulsion if they make the slightest mistake. Annatar reassures them afterwards, explaining that the blacksmith is overwhelmed by the importance of the Rings.

Celebrimbor, cannot forge the Rings of Men, and they have no Mithril left. He is very irritable, and forgets the name of his assistant. Annatar then shows up with a request from citizens who want to speak to their lord. Celebrimbor confides in him that he is tired and confused, but that the Rings come first. Annatar takes charge of the administration of the city and the supply of Mithril.

When Commander Malendol informs him that he has sent soldiers on the road and that only one has returned, but he has died. His body is mutilated with Runes engraved on it. Mirdania, who is present, asks if Celebrimbor should be informed. Annatar assures him that he must not be disturbed, even his blacksmith assistants must not go to see him. You have to bury the body and not talk about it.

He then went to Khazad-dûm, for the MIthril. He offered timber for the mines or other wealth in exchange. Durin III refused. Annatar bows and sees the shape of a Balrog in a torch before withdrawing. He finally gets some from Narvi.

At Ost-in-Edhil, the enemies were finally seen and the alarm sounded. There is panic in the city. Annatar cuts his hand with a knife and goes up to see Celebrimbor. The latter, who is working on The Rings of Men, wonders the nature of the noise he hears outside. Annatar tries to hold him back, even threating him with disgrace for abanonding his work to "save" the world from Sauron, but the blacksmith wants to get off and see what happens. Sauron then casts a spell and when Celebrimbor comes out of the tower, he sees the city by day where everything seems idyllic. Annatar hands him the hammer of Fëanor, he explains that the Rings of Power will be his life's work and that they will eclipse the Silmarils in the memory of the elves. He gives him the little Mithril he has obtained. Celebrimbor climbs back into his tower to continue his work, for a final try. As soon as the blacksmith disappears, the reality of the panicked night city returns. Annatar smiles at the chaos to come. During the battle, he takes command of the defense and asserts himself as the Lord of Eregion, claiming that Celebrimbor has gone mad and is refusing to be disturbed. Annatar orders the army to enact a plan, but is surprised when the river is blocked by the orcs shooting a cliff to fall into it with their siege engines. Annatar, through the chaos and killing, keeps the illusion going to make Celebrimbor think it is fine to keep working. Eventually, Celebrimbor confronts him, recognizing that he is being trapped in an illusion- to which Annatar responds by revealing his identity as Sauron to a horrified Celebrimbor. He then takes Celebrimbor escaping and ordering his arrest as a means to frame Celebrimbor for the murder of his chief assistant Mirdania, which he uses magic to push off the city walls into a horde of Orcs. Celebrimbor is eventually chained up, but cuts off his own thumb to break free and escapes briefly with the Nine Rings for Men; after giving these rings to Galadriel, he returns to distract Sauron, who tortures him at length.

While at the Forge, Sauron continues torturing Celebrimbor to discover the location of the rings, but this is to no avail due to Celebrimbor's strength and will. After insulting Sauron and hinting at his ruin, Sauron murders Celebrimbor in an act of rage- just before Glug and a company of Orcs enter the forge. To the surprise of Glug, Sauron speaks kindly and is persuasive, getting Glug and his company of Orcs to submit to him and agree to betray Adar. Sauron, through unknown means (perhaps his powers), goes in secret with an "injured" Glug and his company, who go to Adar- and reveal their new allegiance by stabbing Adar to death in the same fashion Adar tried to kill him; Glug and the other Orcs now take orders from Sauron, who sends them to kill all the Elves in Eregion but take their leaders captive.

After killing Adar, Sauron duels with Galadriel and takes both the Nine Rings and Morgoth's Crown, but to his anger, she refuses to be his queen again and chooses to throw herself off a cliff rather than give him her Elven ring. Later, when Glug reports to him that the Elven retreat is being supported by reinforcements sent from Khazad-Dum, and that pursuit will cause many Orcs to die, Sauron takes out his anger along with his desire to crush independent thought and sadistically murders Glug by plunging Adar's sword through his throat. The Orcs, now terrified of Sauron killing them, hopelessly return to battle where many of them are slain. Sauron is later shown standing nearby Glug's body, holding Celebrimbor's hammer.

In video games
In The Lord of the Rings Online, Annatar is depicted in a mural in the ruins of 'Tham Mírdain'. He was called 'Antheron' ("Gift Lord"), because Turbine does not have the rights to the name "Annatar". In the session play quest 'Daughter of Strife' from Volume I: Book XV, where the player takes on the character of Narmaleth, Sauron is also encountered in his disguise of Annatar (Antheron), at the time he taught the Elves of Eregion the secrets of the Rings. Visiting Sauron's personal chambers in Dol Guldur leads to a vision of the Dark Lord, still weak and recovering from his defeat at the hand of Isildur. During an extended flashback sequence to the War of the Last Alliance, Sauron himself is met within Barad-dûr by the player, who controls a historic character.
In the strategy game The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth, Sauron is one of the 'Ring Heroes', the other being Galadriel, which can be summoned when a player successfully finds Gollum and takes the One Ring by killing him. He can only be summoned by the evil factions Mordor, Isengard, and Goblins. Sauron is likely the strongest unit in the game, as he has immense health and can instantly kill most infantry and cavalry units with his mace. More powerful units, such as Trolls and Ents, are still no match for him in small amounts, being easily neutralized in a few blows. Sauron is also able to summon fiery rocks from the skies and demoralise enemy units, causing them to run around in panic. When Sauron is killed, he explodes violently, heavily damaging any enemy units in the vicinity. Upon his death, he drops the One Ring, which may then be picked up again.
In the 2014 Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor video game, Sauron appears before Celebrimbor as Annatar (or the rights equivalent), the Lord of Gifts, and deceives him into creating the Rings of Power. After the secret forging of the One Ring, Annatar takes Celebrimbor to Mordor to perfect the One Ring. Celebrimbor later escapes Mordor with the Ring and uses its power to challenge Sauron in battle. At the last moment, the Ring slips from Celebrimbor's finger. As vengeance, Sauron captures Celebrimbor, transforms back into Annatar and proceeds to torture and kill Celebrimbor's captive family in front of him, and then Celebrimbor himself. These events are expanded upon in a DLC campaign, where Sauron acts as the final boss. In the main campaign, Sauron sends his minions to seize Udun and the Black Gate, massacring the Gondorian Rangers stationed there. His minions conduct a dark ritual intended to bring back the wraith of Celebrimbor so he can forge Sauron a New Ring of Power while the One Ring remains missing, killing the player character Talion and his family. However while it initially seems a failure, it had succeeded in binding the spirit of Celebrimbor to Talion, banishing him from death, being deemed by his enemies as the Gravewalker. Towards the end of the campaign, one of Sauron's agents, the Hand of Sauron, becomes host to Sauron's new physical body and Sauron acts as the Final Boss, temporarily defeated.
In the 2017 sequel to the above, Middle-earth: Shadow of War, Sauron largely remains a distant force until the climax of the game. Talion and Celebrimbor styling themselves as the 'Bright Lord' lead their host of dominated Orcs to confront Sauron at the still under-construction Barad-dûr. However Talion and Celebrimbor's alliance is severed when they defeat a ringwraith revealed to be the Gondorian King Isildur. Celebrimbor takes their 'New Ring of Power', and grants it to the elf Eltariel, believing she would act more ruthlessly and efficiently. Finishing the march to Barad-dûr, they ends up fighting Sauron despite still being weakened by the loss of the One Ring. Sauron use both his armored form, and his Giftbringer forms during the encounter. Despite putting up a good fight, he is overwhelmed by Celebrimbor and his new host Eltariel who plan on dominating him with the power of their own New Ring. Before succumbing, he cuts off Eltariel's ring finger like Isildur had done to him years earlier, and consumes Celebrimbor's wraith. While he survives, this forces him into a new form; a 'Flaming Eye' at the top of Barad-dûr, locked in a battle of wills with the Elf for decades. While Sauron and the Bright Lord are occupied, Talion having used the 'Ring of Power' belonging to the Ringwraith Isildur once again sets to conquering Mordor with a new army of dominated Orcs, in a set of decades long 'Shadow Wars'. While he succeeds he is ultimately corrupted by Saurons influence, banishing Celebrimbor from Sauron, now once again robbed of his physical body. The final resolution only comes when the One Ring is destroyed decades later during The Return of the King. It is also revealed that Celebrimbor and his family were killed by Sauron using Túrann, the Mithril forge hammer, once gifted to Celebrimbor by Annatar.
Sauron appears in both LEGO The Lord of the Rings: The Video Game and LEGO The Hobbit: The Video Game; in the first he is a boss and playable character while he is featured as a playable character in the latter. His boss form appears as a massive CCBS figure-similar to something from LEGO's Knights Kingdom line, while as a playable character he appears as a mini-figure. In The Hobbit game he appears in both Necromancer and fiery armored forms. The first game also features an Annatar mini-figure as a downloadable character.
Sauron's mini-figure form, voiced by Steven Blum, also appears in LEGO Dimensions, where he invades the DC Comics' dimension, taking over Metropolis with the aid of the Rift Keystone. Soon thereafter, Sauron uses the Rift Keystone to bring Barad-dûr across dimensions to stand atop Lexcorp tower. When Batman, Gandalf, and Wildstyle arrive in the city to retake the Keystone, Sauron engages the three in a battle atop a Doctor Who Dalek saucer. Eventually, he is defeated, being pulled through a rift by Lord Vortech, the primary antagonist. Sauron is turned into a cube and does not appear again.
In The Lord of the Rings: Conquest, Sauron is a playable character.
Sauron appears in the introduction sequences of J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Volume 1 and its sequel, J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. II: The Two Towers.
A parody of Sauron, "Serum", appears in the adventure game Bored of the Rings.
A parody of Sauron along his minions which it was a sporks in Veggietales special The Lord of the Beans.
In other media
Sauron also appears or is referenced in a number of works that are not direct adaptations of The Lord of the Rings or its associated mythos:

Sauron of Marvel Comics adopted the name in homage to the Tolkien character.
Sauron served as the inspiration for the My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic antagonist King Sombra in his initial appearance.
In The LEGO Batman Movie, Sauron-in his flaming eye from atop his tower-is among the villains recruited by The Joker to aid in his conquest of Gotham City. His powers of vision prove quite a nuisance to Batman and his companions, but he is eventually inadvertently destroyed by the Kraken's mouth projectile. He is voiced by actor Jemaine Clement.
In The Lord of the Rings-based Minecraft mod, Sauron was an unimplemented mob in the mod.