Title: Teleri
Source: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Teleri

Teleri
The Teleri (Quenya: 'Those who come last'; singular Teler; adjectival Telerin) were the third Elf clan to leave Cuiviénen, the place of the Elves' awakening, and start the journey to Aman. Those who completed the journey became known as the Falmari. They were the ancestors of the Calaquendi Teleri (Falmari), as well as the Sindar and Nandor (including the Laiquendi) of Middle-earth.

This third clan was the largest of the three houses of the Elves, and most of the Avari originally belonged to them. In ancient times, they named themselves Lindar (Quenya; singular Linda; adj. Lindarin), or "Singers", because they were known for their fair voices. They were also called Nelyar (Quenya: "The Third"; singular Nelya; adj. Nelyarin). The Sindar of Beleriand called themselves simply Edhil, which means "Elves", and is related to the Quenya word Eldar of the same meaning.

History
According to legend, the Elves awoke at Cuiviénen, the Water of Awakening, in the far east of Middle-earth in the starlight of the Long Night, before the creation of the Sun and Moon. The Teleri were supposedly descended from Enel, the third Elf to awake in Cuiviénen, his spouse Enelyë and their companions. Soon developing spoken language, the first name they gave themselves was Quendi, or 'the ones who speak with voices'.

Although the first of the Ainur to discover the Elves was indeed Oromë, their initial discovery was by Melkor, who would send shadows and evil spirits to spy on them. When Elves would stray off alone, some were taken by Melkor or his agents. These Elves were brought to Utumno, and were believed to be twisted and mutilated into the first Orcs, who would become the most bitter enemy of the elven people.

On one of his many journeys in the wilds of Middle-earth, Oromë discovered the Elves. He quickly came to love the Elves, and gave them the name Eldar, or 'people of the stars'. This name was later only used in reference to those who followed him on the westward road.

Oromë's discovery of the Eldar prompted much debate among the Valar, both in regards to Melkor and the Elves themselves. These debates eventually led to two great events, the Chaining of Melkor, and the Great Journey of the Elves to Aman.

Once it was decided that the Elves should be brought to Valinor, Oromë return to lead them. However, aside from Oromë himself, the only introduction the Elves had to the Valar were the great upheavals of nature that was the result of their wrath during The Chaining of Melkor; and they were reluctant to follow Oromë. Therefore Oromë chose three ambassadors from among the Elves to travel with him to Valinor. These Elves were Ingwë, Finwë, and Elwë.

When the three returned, they spoke to their people of the beauty and bliss of what they had seen and urged the Eldar to travel to Valinor and abide there, convincing the majority of the Elves to do so. The remaining Elves, preferring the starlight and wide open spaces of Middle-earth to the rumor of the Two Trees, decided to stay. These Elves were known as the Avari, or 'the unwilling'.

This initial separation of the Elven people into two groups, the Eldar and the Avari, became known as The Sundering of the Elves.

In preparing the Eldar to travel west, they were organized into three hosts. The first to set forth, and the smallest, was the Vanyar, or 'the fair elves'. They chose Ingwë as their High Lord. Very few, if any of the Vanyar stayed behind or returned to Middle-earth. After reaching Valinor, Ingwë himself never again left.

The next group was the Ñoldor, or 'those with knowledge'. They chose Finwë to lead them. It was the majority of the Ñoldor who, after Melkor and Ungoliant poisoned the Two Trees, chose to leave Valinor and return to Middle-earth at the urging of Fëanor, to pursue Melkor (then known as Morgoth) and a future land of their own to rule.

The last and by far the largest group was the Teleri, or 'those who came last', because they tarried on the road and were the least willing of the three groups to leave Middle-earth. The Teleri were particularly enamored with the sea, and after finally arriving in Aman were eventually known as the Falmari or 'sea elves'. Aside from being known for their love of water and the sea, the Teleri were also the greatest singers of all of the Elven people. Ossë and Uinen were particularly fond of the Teleri, and loved to hear their voices mingling with the sound of the waves on the shore.

Because of the size of the Teleri, they comprised two companies, and a separate lord was chosen to lead each. The first group was led by Elwë Singollo (who was later known as Elu Thingol) and the second by Olwë, his brother.

The Elves that eventually made it to Valinor were known as the Calequendi, or 'elves of the light'. Those who set out initially, but never arrived in Aman, were called the Úmanyar, or "not of Aman". Most of the Umanyar were of the Teleri. The Calequendi referred to both the Umanyar and the Avari as the Moriquendi, or 'elves of the darkness', because they never beheld the light of the Two Trees of Valinor.

After many years and much hardship on the road, the Eldalie eventually reached the River Anduin, and beyond it the Misty Mountains, which were significantly taller and more terrible in that age of the world. Passing over the river, the Vanyar and the Ñoldor crossed the mountains with Oromë, while the Teleri stayed on the East side of the river, afraid of the great mountains beyond.

Eventually the Vanyar and the Ñoldor crossed what is now known as Eriador, coming to and crossing the Ered Luin, or Blue Mountains, and reaching western Middle-earth. Settling in Beleriand, the Vanyar and Ñoldor would continue west, eventually reaching the sea.

During the Teleri sojourn east of the Anduin, Lenwe, from the host of Olwe, lead a numerous group of Elves southward down the eastern side of the river, forsaking their march to Valinor. This group of Elves became known as the Nandor, and were separated from their kin for many long years. After Elwë began his rule of a portion of the Teleri in Beleriand, Lenwe's son Denethor eventually led a portion of the Nandor west over the mountains into Beleriand, joining the Sindar elves there.

Greatly desiring to once again behold the light of Valinor, and missing the close friendship he had with Finwë, Elwë eventually convinced the Teleri to cross the Misty Mountains. Urging his people on, the Teleri eventually crossed Eriador and the Blue Mountains as well, settling in eastern Beleriand. As Finwë and the Ñoldor had settled further west (eventually reaching the sea), Elwë would often travel through the forests to visit the Ñoldor.

While on one of these journeys, Elwë was traveling through the forests of Nan Elmoth when he heard the voice of Melian the Maiar as she sang among the trees. Upon approaching her, he fell under her enchantment. Both Melian and Elwë remained under this enchantment for many years as the forest aged around them.

While Elwë was under the sway of Melian's enchantment, the Vanyar and the Ñoldor hearkened to the summons of Ulmo, reaching the sea and eventually embarking upon an island Ulmo uprooted from the sea floor. They were then all carried upon this island across the sea to Valinor.

The Teleri, living in Eastern Beleriand, did not hear the summons of Ulmo until it was too late. Upon learning that their Kindred, the Vanyar and Ñoldor were gone, most of the Teleri took Olwe as their king (Elwë was still missing at this time) and travelled westward to the sea. While living on the seashore, the Teleri were visited by Ossë and Uinen who befriend them, and taught them much about the sea. Having always nurtured a deep love of the water, the Teleri fell in love with the sea as well.

Many years passed, and, missing the friendship they shared with the Teleri, the Ñoldor (including Finwë their King) asked Ulmo if he might beseech the Teleri to finish their journey to Valinor. With the passing of the years, the Teleri had also grown to miss the companionship of the other Elves, and most of them were indeed willing to make the journey.

Upon learning of the intention of Ulmo, Ossë and Uinen convinced many of the Teleri to stay with them and live on the seashore of Middle-earth, as they had grown fond of the Teleri's company. Those Elves that stayed behind were known as the Falathrim, the Elves of the Falas, and were the first mariners and shipwrights of Middle-earth. Cirdan the shipwright was their lord, and they built the cities of Eglarest and Brithombar on the Belerian coast.

Ulmo once again brought the island back to Middle-earth, and, embarking upon it, the Teleri continued their journey to Aman. The friends and family of Elwë alone refused to leave, continuing their search for him.

Upon emerging from his enchantment, Elwë was again declared King of all Teleri that remained behind, with Melian his wife as Queen. His people were called the Sindar, or Grey Elves, the 'elves of the twilight'. Eventually, almost all Moriquendi living in Beleriand recognized Elwë as King. Though never reaching Valinor again in life, Elwë (now called Elu Thingol in the tongue of the Sindar) was still considered one of the Eldar, as he had beheld the light of Valinor.

While being carried across the sea, the Teleri heard Ossë calling out to them. Hearing his voice and desiring to stay near the sea, the Teleri begged Ulmo to end their journey. Knowing their heart, and originally arguing against bringing the Eldar out of Middle-earth, Ulmo secured the island to the foundation of the sea in the Bay of Eldamar, also called Elvenhome. Still separated from the Vanyar and Ñoldor, the isle became known as Tol Eressea, or 'the lonely isle'.

Expecting the Teleri to join the rest of the Eldar, the Valar were surprised and not entirely pleased by the actions of Ulmo.

Learning that the Vanyar and Ñoldor still wished to see the light of the stars as well as the light of Valinor, the Valar created a gap the great walls of the Pelori, a deep valley named Calacirya. And in this valley that ran down to the sea they raised a high green hill , called Túna, upon which the Vanyar and Ñoldor built the city Tirion. From the west of Túna the light of the trees washed over Tirion, even reaching Tol Eressëa itself, making its western shore rich and green. With the Pelori now opened for them, the Elves in Tirion could behold the night sky, the Bay of Elvenhome, Tol Eressëa, and even the great sea beyond.

After a long age, the hearts of the Teleri began to change, and they were drawn towards the light that flowed out of Valinor over Tol Eressea. Being torn between their love of the sea, and their desire to enjoy the kinship of the other Elves amidst the light of Valinor, the desire of the light ended up being the stronger.

At the behest of the other Valar, Ulmo sent Ossë to teach the Teleri how to build ships. And as a parting gift, Ossë gave the Teleri many great swans to pull their ships across the waters of the bay and reach the shore of Aman at last. In reverence to Ossë, their friend, the Teleri built their ships in the likeness of great swans, with beaks of gold, and eyes of gold or jet.

Still enamored by the sound of the sea, and yearning to spend their time sailing in their ships, the Ñoldor and the Teleri built the city of Alqualonde. It was located on the coast of Aman, in the confines of Eldamar (the east coast of Aman, between the sea and the Pelori) north of Calacirya. The location of the city was chosen because it was home to a natural stone harbor, as well as the stars being more clearly visibly on this stretch of the Eldamar. Of breathtaking beauty, the city of Alqualonde purportedly had walls lined with pearls and gems, and was known for the natural stone arch, carved by the waters of the sea, that spanned the entrance of the harbor.

During their long sojourn apart in Midde-earth and the lonely isle, the speech of the Teleri was sundered from that of the Vanyar and the Ñoldor, and remained distinct ever after. Their distinct language, love of the sea, and maritime skills are likely where the name the Falmari, or Sea Elves, derives from.

During the Flight of the Ñoldor, Fëanor approached the Teleri in Alqualonde and asked for their aid to leave Valinor. The Teleri refused to join or aid the Ñoldor in leaving, instead trying to convince them to stay. Adamant in his refusal to stay, and angered by the Teleri refusal for aid, Fëanor waited for his host to assemble and began taking the Teleri ships by force. A battle ensued, in which the Teleri at first seemed to be gaining the upper hand, driving Fëanor's host back three times. However, most of the remaining Ñoldor forces under Fingolfin and his son Fingon arrived, and upon seeing a pitched battle and not knowing the cause, rushed to the aid of their kin, the Ñoldor under Fëanor, and turned the tide of the battle in the Ñoldor's favor.

Many were slain on both sides. However lacking the arms and armament of the Ñoldor, the Teleri lost a great part of their mariners that dwelt at Alqualonde. This act by the Ñoldor eventually became known in elven lore as The Kinslaying at Alqualonde.

Angered and grieved at the brutal slaying of so many of her beloved mariners, Uinen, wife of Ossë, caused a great storm to sink many of the stolen ships, killing the Ñoldor on board. Despite this, the greater part of the Ñoldor escaped with their lives and the stolen ships of the Teleri.

Because of the Kinslaying, few or none of the Teleri joined the host of the Valar which set out to capture Morgoth for good. It is recounted that the Teleri eventually forgave the Ñoldor for the Kinslaying, and the two kindreds were finally able to make peace.

Their tongue, known as Telerin or Lindalambë ("tongue of the Lindar"), was considered by some to be a dialect of Quenya, but the Teleri themselves considered it to be an independent language. It was much more conservative than Quenya, and was the closest to Common Telerin (from which Sindarin and Nandorin were also derived), and even to Common Eldarin of the later Elvish languages.

Other versions of the legendarium
In the early versions of J.R.R. Tolkien's mythology (see The History of Middle-earth), they were known as Solosimpi ("Pipers of the Shores"), while the names Teleri and Lindar were given to the clan of Elves known in the published version of The Silmarillion as Vanyar.

