Title: Valar
Soruce: https://lotr.fandom.com/wiki/Valar

The Valar (Quenya; singular Vala) were the Powers of Arda who governed the world under the direction of Eru Ilúvatar. They dwelt on the western continent of Aman.

History
The Valar were the 14 Ainur who, after being molded of Eru's thought, entered Arda after its creation to give order to the world and combat the new evils of Melkor. They had helped to begin the shaping of Arda through the music of Ilúvatar, and often referred to one another as "brother" or "sister". Each of the Ainur had added his or her own part to the music, creating the world incarnate, save for Melkor, who at the time was counted as the strongest of them. His vision of what Arda should have been differed from Eru's, which led to his banishment and great rebellion that would cause most of the ills of the world of Arda.
Following the creation, the 14 Valar dwelt first on Almaren, a hidden island on the Great Lake, but after it was destroyed and the earth was reshaped, long before the Awakening of the Elves, they relocated to Aman and founded the realm of Valinor.[1] They would become known as the 'Powers of the World', though rarely directly intervening in the world's course of events. Eru instead gave them delegation of Arda, and so at Valinor they constructed the golden city of Váli-màr, their own mansions dispersed across the plain; and Máhanaxar, the "Ring of Doom", at which they would confer and hold counsels.
Eru created for them lesser heavenly beings named the 'Maiar', who were their servants. Though subordinate to the Valar, the Maiar were powerful nonetheless, and included Melian, Sauron (named Mairon), Olórin (later named Gandalf) and the other Istari, and those who would become the Balrogs. Most Maiar were associated with particular Valar: Ossë and Uinen, the "powers of the oceans", served under Ulmo, while Curumo (much later known as Saruman), served Aulë the Smith. Sauron also served Aulë before being corrupted by Melkor to the point he betrayed the Valar and became Melkor's servant. Sauron along with several other Maiar (such as Balrogs) were corrupted by Melkor into betraying the Valar and serving under him early in the First Age.

It was originally Melkor's intention to rule Arda for himself, but Manwë, the superior of the Valar, called other spirits to help him confront Melkor. (Among these were the other Valar and the Maiar.) Melkor withdrew from Arda after the short Battle of the Powers, and the Valar continued their creation and furnishing of the World, while Melkor plotted to return and regain dominance. In time, once he returned in secret and ruined the Two Trees of Valinor with Ungoliant, Valinor lost its light, and the Valar eventually set to creating the Sun and Moon in the sky.

The War of the Jewels at the end of the First Age was prompted after Fëanor refused to forfeit his Silmarils to the Valar for the rekindling of the Two Trees. He ended his and the Ñoldor's allegiance with the Valar, and bore a new conflict between the Elves and Melkor.[2] The Valar soon fortified their realm, and brought about the "Hiding of Valinor", preventing Melkor and Fëanor and his followers from entering. The conflict between Melkor and the Valar was not resolved until the war's climax, during which the Valar came physically into Beleriand, helped conquer Melkor's forces at Angband, and captured him. He was taken to Aman and cast behind the Door of Night.[3] However, a handful of Morgoth's army (such as Sauron and one Balrog) managed to escape.

In the Second Age, the Valar created anew the island of Elenna in the middle of the Sea, for the noble peoples of the Edain who had resisted and endured the war against Melkor. On this island was established the kingdom of Númenor, which lasted three millennia until their king Ar-Pharazôn attempted to contravene the Ban of the Valar due to him being deceived by Sauron into believing that the Undying Lands grants immortality. The Valar sank the island, and the living Númenóreans sailed eastward, and settled Middle-earth.

When Sauron began regaining his power in Middle-earth around 1000 years into the Third Age, many years after his defeat in the War of the Last Alliance at the end of the Second Age, the Valar sent an order of five Maiar, the "Istari", unto Middle-earth, to provide a strong opposition to Sauron until his final destruction.

Powers & abilities
Like the other Ainur, the powers of the Valar were ambiguously mysterious. The Valar had similar and superior abilities to the Maiar, such as the controlling light and of fire, transforming into many forms, or trancing Men or Elves with their presence. Manwë and Ulmo controlled the winds and waters of Arda, respectively. Yavanna and Nienna created the Two Trees, Laurelin and Telperion, to illuminate much of Aman. Varda could realign stars into constellations that prophesied the doom of Morgoth. The Valar together had the power to raise the vast island of Númenor up to the surface of the Sea.

Names
These are the names of the Valar as they were known to the Eldar. In Middle-earth, they were known by other names of Sindarin origin; for example they called Varda Elbereth. Men knew them by many other names, and sometimes worshiped them as Gods. The Elves called Varda, the creator of the stars, Elentári. The dwarves called Aulë, their creator, Mahal. The Ents called Yavanna, their creator, Kementári. It should be noted that, with the exception of Oromë, the names listed below are not actual names but rather titles: the true names of the Valar are nowhere recorded. Male Valar are called "Lords of the Valar"; females are called "Ladies of the Valar", or Valier. Among these exist six married couples, with only Ulmo and Nienna remaining single.

Other names
The Aratar (Sindarin: Exalted) or High Ones of Arda were the eight greatest of the Valar: Manwë, Varda, Ulmo, Yavanna, Aulë, Mandos, Nienna, and Oromë. Melkor, the most powerful of all, is not counted among them. Lórien and Mandos were brothers, and would be referred to together as the Fëanturi or "Masters of Spirits".

In earlier versions of the legendarium, "Gods" was a word used often to refer to them,[4] and Valur and Valir for a short time denoted male and female Valar.

List of the Valar
Lords of the Valar
Manwë Súlimo the King of the Winds, King of the Valar, and husband of Varda
Melkor (Morgoth) the First Dark Lord, the strongest Vala before he was banished from the group
Ulmo the Sea King, Lord of Water
Aulë the Smith, and the Lord of Earth and all that's underneath, and husband of Yavanna
Oromë Aldaron the Huntsman, the Lord of Forests, and the Great Rider, and husband of Vána
Námo (Mandos) the Doomsman, and the Judge of the Dead, and husband of Vairë
Irmo (Lórien) the Lord and Master of Dreams, Visions, and Desires, and Creator of the Oloré Mallé, or Path of Dreams, and husband of Estë
Tulkas Astaldo the Wrestler, the Champion of Valinor, and last of the Valar to come to Arda; husband of Nessa

Ladies of the Valar
Varda Elentári the Star Queen, Queen of the Valar and wife of Manwë
Yavanna Kementári the Fruit-Giver, Lady of Earth and wife of Aulë
Nienna the Weeper, the Lady of Mercy
Estë the Gentle, Lady of Healing and Rest, and wife of Irmo
Vairë the Weaver, wife of Mandos
Vána the Ever-young, and wife of Oromë
Nessa the Dancer, wife of Tulkas

Others
There are some Valar, conceived of in other versions of the legendarium, that do not appear in the published Silmarillion. An idea later discarded by Tolkien was that the Valar had children, called Valarindi.[6]

Ilinsor, servant of Manwë and steerer of the Moon
Lúsion, son of Telimektar
Makar and Meássë, the restless warriors
Nielíqui, daughter of Oromë and Vána
Nornorë, the Herald of the Valar
Òmar, the youngest of the Valar and the brother of Salmar
Silmo, the guardian of the silver tree Silpion
Telimektar, son of Tulkas and of the Maia Lëa-vinya